1st Edition, 2017
Copies may be obtained from: 
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH)
Government of India
AYUSH BHAWAN
B Block, GPO Complex, INA 
New Delhi-110023 
India
Telefax: 011-24651964
Website: www.ayush.gov.in
First Edition, October 2017
© Copyright 2017, Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India. Any part of this document may be 
reproduced, copied or adapted to meet local needs, without permission from Ministry of AYUSH, 
provided that the parts reproduced are not tinkered and are distributed free of charge or at no 
cost – not for profit. 
Published and funded by: 
Ministry of AYUSH,  Government of India, New Delhi, India
Printing coordinated by: 
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth
(Under Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India)
Dhanwantari Bhawan, Road No 66, 
Punjabi Bagh (West), New Delhi-110026, India
Phone: 011-25228548
Telefax: 011-25229753
Website: www.ravidyapeethdelhi.com
Design and Printing By:
M/s  Graphic Printers
2965/41, Beadon Pura, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005
Email:graphicprinters26@gmail.com
Ayurvedic Standard  
Treatment Guidelines
A document prepared by  
Ministry of AYUSH  
Government of India  
Executive Editor
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Adviser (Ay)  
Ministry of AYUSH
AYUSH BHAWAN
B Block, GPO Complex, INA
New Delhi-110023, India
Collaborative Institutes 
Institute for Postgraduate Teaching &  
Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar 
and 
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur


Executive Editor
Vaidya Manoj Nesari,
Adviser (Ay)  
Ministry of AYUSH  
Govt. of India, New Delhi
Editors
Professor M. S. Baghel
Former Director, Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
Professor Anup  Thakar
Director, Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
Dr. S. K. Khandel
Former Head, Dept. of Roga Nidan, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
Dr. Pawan Godatwar
Professor, Dept. of Roga Nidan, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
Dr. Prakash Mangalasseri
Associate Professor, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, VPSV Ayurveda College,  
Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala
Coordinator
Dr. Mandip Goyal
Associate Professor, Dept. of Kayachikitsa,  
Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
Peer Reviewers: 
1. Professor Gurdip Singh, Former 
Director, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda , 
Jamnagar
2. Professor R. H. Singh, Professor 
Emeritus, Faculty of Ayurveda Banaras 
Hindu University, Varanasi
3. Professor R. B. Dwivedi, Former Director 
& Head, Dept. of Basic Principles, 
Institute for Post Graduate Teaching 
& Research in Ayurveda , Jamnagar4. Professor Abhimanyu Kumar, Director, 
All India Institute of Ayuveda, New 
Delhi
5. Professor H. M. Chandola, Former 
Director/ Principal, Ch. Brahm Prakash 
Ayurved Charak Sansthan, Najafgarh, 
New Delhi
6. Dr. S. N. Gupta, Head, Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, J. S. Ayurveda College, 
Nadiad – Gujarat
7. Professor Tanuja Nesari, Head, Dept. 
of Dravyaguna, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
vi AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 
8. Professor Meeta Kotecha, Head, Dept. 
of Dravyaguna, National Institute of 
Ayuveda, Jaipur
9. Professor Mahesh Chandra Sharma, 
Former Director, National Institute of 
Ayuveda, Jaipur
10. Dr. Haridra Dave, Head, Dept. of 
Shalakya Tantra, J. S. Ayurveda College, 
Nadiad - Gujarat 
11. Dr. B. M. Singh, Dept. of Kaumarbhritya, 
Faculty of Ayurveda, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi
12. Dr. Ved Prakash Vyas, Dept. of Bal  
Roga, Govt. Dhanwantri Ayurved 
College, Ujjain
13. Dr. Eswar Sarma, Principal, VPSV 
Ayurveda College, Edarikkode, 
Kottakal, Kerala
14. Dr. P. Rammanohar, Research Director, 
Amrita Center for Advanced Research 
in Ayurveda, Amritapuri, Kerala
15. Professor A. K. Tripathi, Vice Chancellor, 
Ayurved and Unani Services, Dehradun, 
Uttarakhand
16. Dr. M. M. Padhi, Deputy Director, 
Central Council for Research in 
Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi
17. Dr. D. K. Dwivedi, Medical 
Superintendent, S. R. M. Government 
Ayurveda College and Hospital, 
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh
18. Dr. Kishor Sinh Chudasama, Former 
Principal, Sheth J. P. Govt. College, 
Bhavnagar, Gujarat19. Dr. Srinivas Acharya, Professor & 
Head – Dept. of Kayachikitsa, Sri 
Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara 
College of Ayurveda, P. O. Kuthpady, 
Udupi, Karnataka
20. Vd. Tapan Vaidya, Associate Professor 
Dept. of Kayachikitsa, J.S. Ayurveda 
College, Nadiad – Gujarat
21. Professor Manda Ghorpade, Professor, 
Head, Dept. of Stree Roga Prasutitantra, 
Sumatibhai Shalu Ayurved 
Mahavidyalaya Hadapsar, Pune, 
Maharashtra
22. Dr. Jayant Deopujari, Consultant, 
Shrinidhi Ayurveda Panchakarma 
Chikitsalaya, Nagpur, Maharashtra
23. Dr. Manoj A. K., Professor, Dept. of 
Panchakarma, VPSV Ayurveda College, 
Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala.
24. Professor Umesh Shukla, Principal, 
Pt. Khushilal Sharma Government 
Ayurveda College, Bhopal
25. Dr. B. L. Mehra, Head, Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, R.G. Govt. Ayurvedic 
College, Paprola, Kangra (H.P.) 
26. Dr. Rakesh Sharma, Reader, Dept of Bala 
Roga PG Section, R.G. Govt. Ayurvedic 
College, Paprola, Kangra (H.P.)
27. Dr. Sasikumar, Chief Physician, Nechiyil 
Ayurveda Vaidyasala and Nursing 
Home, Karalmana, Palakkad, Kerala
28. Professor Y. K. Sharma, Principal cum 
Dean & Head, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, 
Rajiv Gandhi Govt Ayurvedic College, 
Paprola, Distt. – Kangra, Himachal 
Pradesh
 
vii                                                                               AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 29. Dr V. N. K. Usha, Professor, Dept. of 
Stree Roga and Prasutitantra, SDM 
college of Ayurveda, P.O. Kuthpady, 
Udupi, Karnataka
30. Dr A. R. V. Murthy, Dean & Medical 
Superintendent, Atreya Ayurvedic 
Medical College, Hospital & Research 
Center, Doddaballapura, Bangalore
31. Dr. Vijay Chaudhary, Reader, Dept. 
of Kayachikitsa, Rajiv Gandhi Govt 
Ayurvedic College, Paprola, Distt. – 
Kangra, Himanchal Pradash
32. Dr. Mukund Sabnis, Consultant, 
Jeevan Rekha Ayurved Chikitsalaya 
and Research Center, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra
33. Dr. Bharti, Assistant Director-In-Charge, 
Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Central 
Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences, New Delhi
34. Dr. Renu Singh, Research Officer 
(Ayu), Central Council for Research in 
Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi
35. Professor Ena Sharma, Head, Dept. of 
PTSR, Rajiv Gandhi Govt. Ayurveda 
College, Paprola, Distt. – Kangra, 
Himachal Pradesh
36. Dr. Prashantha A. S., Professor, Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, Ayurved Mahavidyalaya 
and Hospital, Hubli, Karnataka
37. Professor Bishnu Prasad Sharma,  
Head, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, Govern -
ment Ayurvedic college and Hospital,  
Guwahati38. Dr. Neru Nathani, Assistant Prof., Dept. 
of Swasthavritta and Yoga, Faculty of 
Ayurveda, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
39. Dr. Dinesh K S, Assistant Prof., Dept. 
of Kaumar Bhritya, VPSV Ayurveda 
College, Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala
40. Dr. A. R. Trivedi, Former, Head, Dept. of  
Kaumarbhritya, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
41. Dr. Girish K.J., Reader, Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, SDM College of  
Ayurveda, BM Road, Thanniruhalla, 
Hassan, Karnataka
42. Dr. Govind Reddy, Research officer 
(Ayu), In-charge, R.R.A. Podar, Central 
Ayurveda Research institute for Cancer, 
Mumbai.
43. Dr. Manohar Gundeti, Research officer 
(Ayu) R.R.A. Podar, Central Ayurveda 
Research institute for cancer, Mumbai
44. Dr. Bhavana Prasher, Ayurved Scientist, 
Institute of Genomics & Integrative 
Biology, New Delhi
45. Dr. Rakhi Mehra, Former Assistant 
Director-In-charge, Central Ayurveda 
Research Institute for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Central Council for Research 
in Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi
 
viii AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES1. Professor P. K.  Prajapati, Dean & Head, 
Dept. of Rasa Shastra & Bhaishajya 
Kalpana, All India Institute of Ayurveda, 
New Delhi
2. Professor Kalpana Patel, Head, Dept. 
of Kaumarabhritya, Institute for Post 
Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
3. Professor Dhiman K., Director General, 
Central Council for Research in 
Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi
4. Professor Sanjay Gupta, Head, Dept. of  
Shalya, All India Institute of Ayurveda, 
New Delhi
5. Professor L. P. Dei, Incharge Director, 
& Head, Dept. of Stree Roga and 
Prasutitantra, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
6. Professor Manjusha Rajgopala, Head, 
Dept. of Shalakya, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
7. Professor K. S. Nisteshwar, Ex Head, 
Dept. of Dravyaguna, Institute for 
Post Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
8. Professor S. H. Acharya, Dept. of 
Pachakarma, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
9. Professor M. K. Vyas, Head, Dept. of 
Basic Principles, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
10. Professor R. N. Acharya, Head, Dept. of 
Dravyaguna, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat11. Professor B. J. Patgiri, Head, Dept. of 
Rasashastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana, 
Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & 
Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
12. Dr. A. S. Baghel, Incharge Head, 
Associate Prof., Dept. of Basic Principles, 
Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & 
Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
13. Dr. Hitesh Vyas, Associate Prof., Dept. 
of Basic Principles, Institute for Post 
Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
14. Dr. Galib, Associate Prof., Dept. of 
Rasashastra & Bhaishjya Kalpana, All 
India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
15. Dr. T. S. Dudhamal, Incharge Head, 
Associate Prof., Dept. of Shalya, Institute 
for Post Graduate Teaching & Research 
in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
16. Dr. D. B. Vaghela, Incharge Head, 
Associate Prof., Dept. of Shalakya, 
Institute for Post Graduate Teaching & 
Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar
17. Dr. Rajgopala S, Associate Prof., Dept. 
of Kaumarabhitya, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
18. Dr. Shilpa Donga, Associate Prof., Dept. 
of Stree Roga and Prasutitanta, Institute 
for Post Graduate Teaching & Research 
in Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
19. Dr A R Dave, Incharge Head, Associate 
Prof., Dept. of Kayachikitsa, Institute for 
Post Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
20. Dr. Darshana Pandya, Assistant Prof., 
Dept. of Roga Nidan, Institute for Post 
Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, GujaratSubject experts and Contributors – 
21. Dr. B. R. Patel, Assistant Prof., Dept. of 
Dravyaguna, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
22. Dr. Rajkala Ramteke, Research Officer 
(Ayu), Central Ayurveda Research 
Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases, 
Central Council for Research in Ayuveda 
Sciences, New Delhi
23. Dr. Prashant Bedarkar, Assistant Prof, 
Dept. of Rasashastra & Bhaishjya 
Kalpana, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
24. Dr V. K. Kori, Associate Prof., Dept. 
of Kaumarabhritya, Institute for Post 
Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
25. Dr. Vyasdeo Mahanta, Associate Prof., 
Dept. of Shalya, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi, Gujarat
26. Dr. Shubhangi Kamble Assistant Prof., 
Dept. of Basic Principles, Institute for 
Post Graduate Teaching & Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Gujarat
27. Dr. Nilesh Bhatt, Assistant Prof., Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, Institute for Post Graduate 
Teaching & Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
28. Dr. Arpan Bhatt, Head, Dept. of 
Swasthvritta, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
29. Dr. Neha Tank, Reader, Dept. of 
Panchakarma, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
30. Dr. Pashmina Joshi, Reader & Head,  
Dept. of Shalya, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat31. Dr. Rajshree Undakat, Reader & Head,  
Dept. of Shalakya, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
32. Dr. Varsha Solanki, Reader & Head, 
Dept. of Dravyaguna, Shri Gulab 
Kunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
33. Dr. Harshit Shah, Head, Dept. of Shalya 
Tantra, Akhandanand Ayurveda 
College, Opp. Victoria Garden Bhadra, 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
34. Dr. Kamini Dhiman, Associate Prof., 
Dept. of Stree roga and Prasutitanta, All 
India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
35. Dr. Gurucharan Bhuyan, Research officer 
(Ay), Central Council for Research in 
Ayurvedic Sciences, Hq. New Delhi
36. Dr. Ashu Vinayak, Reader, Dept. of 
Shalakya Tantra, Shri Krishna Govt. 
Ayurvedic College & Hospital, Umri 
Road, Near DC Residence, Sec-8, 
Kurukshetra-136118, Haryana
37. Dr. Shantla Priyadarshini, Reader, 
Dept. of Shalakya, Sri Jai Chamrajendra 
Wadeyar Govt. Ayurveda Medical 
College, Mysore, Karnata ka
38. Dr P. K. Shanthakumari, Retd. Prof., 
Matha Ayurveda Eye Hospital, 
Jayprakash Lane, Pokudappanakunnu, 
Thiruvanathpuram, Kerala
39. Dr. Shivanand Gavimath, Assistant 
Prof., Dept. of Shalakya, J. S. S. Ayurved 
Hospital, Mysore, Karnataka
ix AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES

FOREWORD
In last twenty years or so Ayurveda sector has witnessed an upsurge globally. The personalized 
medicine approach of Ayurveda and the huge diversity in Ayurvedic formulations have always 
been glorified by supporters of Ayurveda including practitioners and scientists. At the same 
time the same strengths have been used by others as impediments for its wider implementation 
at public health. The National Health Policy 2017 of India has strongly recommended for 
integrating Ayurveda in main health care delivery. The health policy has focussed on attaining 
Sustainable Development Goals 3 (SDG 3) identified by United Nations (UN). The Ministry 
of AYUSH, Government of India in an effort to streamline the implementation of Ayurveda 
services, has developed Ayurvedic Essential Drug List (EDL). The issue of quality of Ayurvedic 
drugs is also being addressed by developing Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Development 
of Ayurvedic Standard Treatment Guidelines is the next step in standardising the Ayurveda 
services and their mainstreaming in Public Health. 
The work of developing this document has been going on for over two years. It has gone 
through wider consultation involving experts of different Ayurvedic subjects across the country. 
Ayurveda practices in different parts of country have lot of diversity owing to availability of 
local natural resources as well as local Vaidya traditions. The major challenge faced was to 
arrive at consensus on Ayurvedic formulations to be prescribed for different disease conditions 
with respect to available Clinical Infrastructure i.e. PHC/CHC/ DH. There were also issues 
in identifying nearest correlation between Ayurvedic understandings of various disease 
conditions with their allopathy counterpart. The scientists and experts having understanding 
of both systems would understand easily the difficulties underlying. 
The guidelines are neither prescriptive nor restrictive but are more facilitative in nature. The 
guidelines doesn’t restrict Ayurveda practitioners for using various formulations as per their 
wisdom, knowledge of Ayurveda and experience. This is a maiden effort to extract the wider 
scope of Ayurveda practices and accommodate them in to a relatively restrictive format. For 
this purpose 38 most common disease conditions commonly found in general practice have 
been shortlisted. The format has been developed considering the available infrastructure and 
resources at Primary Health Center (PHC) where only OPD facility is available, Community 
Health Center (CHC) having 20 beds and District Hospital (DH) which has 50 beds and 
good diagnostic labs. While developing this document, efforts have been made to explain 
the case and treatment on Ayurvedic principles and thereby to retain the soul of Ayurveda. 
xii AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES xiiAt the same time conventional terminology has been used so that the document should be 
easy to understand for every stakeholder. The introduction and case definition explained 
at the beginning of every disease condition narrates the clinical condition making it easy to 
understand to all stake holders. The references in support of treatment recommended have 
been listed in scientific manner at the end of every chapter. Thus, an effort has been made to 
make these guidelines more scientific and practical for implementation. The document will be 
useful not only to young Ayurveda graduates but also could be useful to supporting staff and 
non-Ayurveda practitioners so as to reach to the last person in the society to realize the dream 
and intention of “Health for All” of the Government. The document, first of its kind would also 
be useful to policy makers in future policy making, to regulators for promoting good Ayurveda 
services as well as to Insurance sector to provide wider coverage to Ayurveda treatment and 
services. The document would also be useful in Government’s drive for promoting Ayurveda 
based Medical and Wellness Tourism. 
The document has undergone nearly six reviews to eliminate any kind of discrepancy. However, 
Ministry would welcome suggestions or further improvements, which in consultation with 
experts and after authentication could be accommodated in next edition.  
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Executive Editor  
Adviser (Ay), Ministry of AYUSH  
Govt. of India 
Date  : 17th October, 2017, Dhanwantari Jayanti
Place : New Delhi


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
Ayurveda is the most ancient system of medicine of Indian origin and is equally relevant in 
modern times. It is the knowledge base of life which, in addition to description of clinical profile 
of diseases, various etiological factors – primary or secondary, the etio-pathogenesis, different 
stages of disease progression, stage wise medical intervention, the prognosis and all such other 
clinical details; has also described in detail the dietary substances, various physical and mental 
activities, role of various epigenetic factors, methods for promotion of health, Community and 
social medicine etc. Ayurveda has also emphasised on social and spiritual wellbeing. The beauty 
of Ayurveda lies in the flexibility it has provided to clinicians in application part i.e. choice of 
medicinal plants, drug formulations, dosage forms etc. which may vary depending upon the 
availability of raw material according to geo-climatic conditions without compromising with 
the fundamental principles.  
India is bestowed with rich bio-diversity. The Himalayan ranges, North east India, Western 
Ghats from Gujarat and extending up to southern tip of India in Kerala are bio-diversity 
hotspots. Around 6000 plant varieties are found in India, out of which 600 are commonly 
used. But that doesn’t mean that other are not used at all. Certain varieties are used in 
certain pockets depending upon the traditions. Some medicinal plants entered in to main 
stream Ayurvedic practice through folklore practices are also within the ambit of Ayurvedic 
principles. According to Ayurveda principles every substance available on earth has some or 
the other medicinal property. At the same time, Ayurveda has also described the mechanism 
of adopting various natural resources in to main stream practice. Many Vaidya traditions have 
some unique specialties of practices those have traversed through generations in their family. 
Most of them have come from their long standing observations, understanding and experience. 
Often, a medicinal plant or part thereof has many medicinal uses; out of those some could be 
popular where as some may not. Apparently, one may find strange the unpopular use, but 
may find their mention in ancient classical text. For e.g. plant parts like leaf, bark, stem, roots 
are commonly used in Ayurvedic medicines. However, flowers are not frequently used. This is 
because, they are season specific and perishable and also difficult to store. 
In India, Ayurveda education and clinical practices are regulated under Indian Medicine 
Central Council Act, 1970 whereas; Ayurveda drugs are regulated under Drugs & Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 and Rules 1945. Enrolment of Ayurveda Clinical practitioners in State Register is 

xvi AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 
regulated under State (Provincial) Ayurveda Practitioners Acts of relevant States. Uniformity 
of curricula and syllabi of graduation level degree course and Post Graduate degree courses in 
various specialties has been maintained throughout the country. However, there is also wide 
diversity observed in the prescriptions of Vaidyas  in different parts of the country, which is 
within the broad frame work of Ayurveda practices recognized under different legislative 
provisions in force. 
As per the market trends, currently Ayurveda practices are gradually shifting on pharma based 
products readily available in market. Nevertheless, few Vaidyas continue to prepare classical 
medicines on their own and also have their own formulations. This is very much legal as per 
the provisions under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Ayurveda practices are not only the prescriptions of medicines but also include various 
procedures. They include Panchakarma procedures, Marma Therapy, Viddha Karma, Agni Karma, 
Upakalpana, dietary preparations etc. 
With the onset of National Health Mission (NHM) in the year 2005, Ayurveda received major 
boost towards mainstreaming in public health through which, Ayurveda services are being 
made available at Primary Health Centres as well as at District Hospitals. In the year 2014, the 
then Department of AYUSH under Ministry of Health and family Welfare was elevated to a 
separate Ministry making clear that Ayurveda is one of the thrust area identified by Government 
towards major reforms in the developing New India. This started a new era for major upsurge 
for Ayurveda nationwide. These efforts are further augmented by the Ministry of AYUSH 
with the implementation of National AYUSH Mission (NAM). Presently, Ayurveda services 
are available in nearly 40% of PHCs throughout the country. At the same time, there is also rise 
of Ayurveda infrastructure in private sector. The Ministry of AYUSH has also encouraged for 
development of tertiary care through Ayurveda. Development All India Institute of Ayurveda 
at New Delhi is a major milestone in this regard. Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
has also encouraged private sector to develop tertiary care services through Ayurveda. As a 
result, few Ayurveda specialty hospitals have come up in private sector in recent past. There is 
increasing trend in well reputed allopathy corporate hospitals to start Ayurveda wing. 
With this background, it was felt necessary to develop an authentic document which could 
provide some basic guidelines about Ayurvedic practices. The present document would be 
useful not only to Ayurveda practitioners but also to regulators, policy makers as well as to 
International community in supporting Ayurveda practices. 
Vaidya Manoj Nesari Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha  
Adviser (Ay) Secretary  
Ministry of AYUSH , Govt. of India  Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
 Developing the Ayurvedic St andard Treatment Guidelines was a stiff task considering 
the diversity in the choice of medicines and the regional variation and also considering that all 
of them are scientific and are based on Ayurvedic principles. Therefore, the task was primarily 
assigned to “Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda”, (IPGT&RA) 
Jamnagar and “National Institute of Ayurveda”, (NIA) Jaipur. Both these are top-notch 
premier institutes of Ayurveda having international repute. I am highly indebted to Directors 
and faculty of these institutes for whole heartedly supporting in this endeavour. This being the 
maiden document, took long time for completion. The initial phase was more crucial wherein 
the template and skeletal content were to be framed. It involved lot of energy. This could be 
achieved because of dynamic leadership of Prof. M.S. Baghel, the then Director of IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar and strongly supported by Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, the then Vice Chancellor of 
Gujarat Ayurveda University and presently Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of 
AYUSH. I am also thankful to Prof. Sanjeev Sharma, the present Director of NIA Jaipur, for 
his support in the last and final phase of completing this document. The coordination of the 
project was skilfully handled by Dr. Mandip Goyal, Associate Prof. of Kayachikitsa, IPGT & RA 
Jamnagar. Dr. Prakash Mangalasseri, Associate Prof. Kayachikitsa, Ayurveda College Kottakal 
had always been resourceful and supportive for getting the job completed. 
 Senior faculty from nearly 32 Ayurveda Institutes including All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi; Faculty of Ayurveda, Banaras Hindu University; Ayurveda College, 
Kottakal; Ch. Brahm Prakash Ayurved Charak Sansthan New Delhi; Rajiv Gandhi Government 
Post-Graduate Ayurvedic College, Paprola; SDM Ayurveda College, Hassan & Udupi; Central 
Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences etc. were involved in developing this document.
Their names and specialty has been listed under list of contributors. The responsibility of 
designing, proof checking etc. and getting the printed this document was assigned to Rashtriya 
Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, New Delhi. Mr. N. Ramakrishnan, A.O. RAV and Dr. Varun Gupta 
efficiently handled this responsibility to complete the task in time bound manner.  
 Most importantly I am grateful to Sh. Shripad Naik, Hon’ble Minister of State, 
Independent Charge for Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India for his vision, guidance 
and continuous support. 
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Adviser (Ay)

ABBREVIATIONS
2D Echo 2 dimensional Echo
ABC Airway, breathing, circulation
AFB Acid-Fast Bacilli
ALT Alanine transaminase
ANA Anti-Nuclear Antibody
ASO Antistreptolysis ‘O’ titer
AST Aspartate Aminotransferase
Ay/Ayu Ayurveda
AYUSH Collective name for Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha & Homeopathy
BMD Bone Mineral Density
BMI Body mass index
BP Blood Pressure
BPH Benign Prostrate Hyper-trophy
BSL Blood sugar level
BT Bleeding time
Ca Calcium
CBC Complete blood count
CHC Community Health Center
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CRP C-reactive protein
CT Scan computed tomography scan
CVA Cerebro - Vascular Accident
DLC Differential leucocyte counts
DM Diabetes Mellitus
DMARD Disease modifying anti rheumatic drugs
Ed. or ed. Edition
ECG Electro cardio gram
EEG Electro Encphalogram
ESR Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
FT3 Free Triiodothyronine 
FT4 Free Thyroxine
GFR Glomerular Filtration Rate
GI or GIT Gastro Intestinal Tract
gm% Gram percent
Govt. Government
GTT Glucose Tolerance Test
H1N1 Swine flu - subtype of the Influenza A virus
H5N1 Bird Flu - subtype of the Influenza A virus
Hb Haemoglobin
HbA1c Glycated Haemoglobin
HBsAg Australia antigen - surface antigen of the Hepatitis B virus
HDL High-density lipoprotein
HIV  Human immune-deficiency virus
IC  Intra cranial
ICA Islet cell Autoantibody
IgG Immunoglobulin G antibody
IgM Immunoglobulin M antibody
IHD Ischemic heart disease
ILD Interstitial Lung Disease
IOP Intraocular pressure 
ISM&H Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
IVP Intravenous Pyelogram
IVU Intravenous Urogram
K Potassium
KSS Kshar Sutra Suturing
xix AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
KUB Collective name for Kidney, Ureter and Bladder
LDL Low-density lipoprotein
LFT Liver Function Test
LPD Lymphoproliferative Disease
MRI scan Magnetic resonance imaging 
Na Sodium
NS1 Antigen-Based ELISA Test for Dengue
OCT Optical coherence tomography
OPD Out Patient Department
PA view Postero-Anterior view
PACG Primary Angle-Closure Glaucoma
PCOD polycystic Ovarian Disease
PCOS Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
PCR Polymerase chain reaction
PHC Primary Health Centre
PNS Paranasal sinuses
POAG Primary open angle glaucoma
P/R Per rectal
PPBS Post prandial blood sugar
PSA Prostate-specific antigen
PUI Platelet Uptake Index
Q.S. Quantity sufficient
RA Rheumatoid arthritis
RFT Renal Function test
RIND Reversible ischemic neurological deficit
S. or Sr. Serum
SLR test Straight leg raised test
T3 Triiodothyronine 
T4 Thyroxine
xx AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
Tab Tablet
TB Tuberculosis
TIA Transient Ischaemic Attack
TLC Total Leucocyte Counts
TRUS Trans Rectal Ultra Sonography
TSH Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
tsp teaspoon
U/Lit Unit per Litre
USG Ultra Sonography
UTI Urinary Tract Infection
VDRL test Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test 
Vol. Volume
xxi AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
GLOSSARY
1. Abhyanga An Ayurvedic oil massage practice. This helps loosen and 
facilitate the removal of accumulated Ama  (toxins) and the 
Doshas  (Vata , Pitta  and Kapha ) from the body.
2. Aadharniya vega Non-suppression of natural urges It means the natural urges 
which should not be suppressed by force as a habit.
3. Aschyotana Type of eye treatment in which drops of herbal liquids are 
put into the eyes.
4. Agantuka External factor
5. Ajirna/ Ajeerna Indigestion, weak digestion
6. Amla Sour taste
7. Anna-vaha srotas The channels transporting grains or food, the digestive 
system, alimentary canal.
8. Anupana Vehicle for medicine
9. Anuvasana (Basti) Enema given with an oily substance
10. Apana One of the five types of Vata , which goes downward and is 
responsible for expulsion of faces, flatus, urine, menstrual 
blood etc.
11. Asatmya Unwholesome, bad, improper.
12. Agni Agni is the form of fire and heat that is the basis of the 
digestive system and the process of release of energy. The 
term includes the body heat, body temperature, sight, the 
digestive fire; its function is transformation, absorption, 
elimination and discrimination is Agni .
13. Ahara Food articles used by human
14. Ahara Rasa It is the nutrient substance developed after digestion process 
taken in the digestive tract where enzymes or the bile juice 
acted upon food articles
15. Ama Toxins or Ama  is produced in the body by the raw, undigested 
food products that become fetid.
16. Artava Menstrual blood
17. Artavavaha Srotas The channel that carries menstrual fluid and ovum; consists 
of female reproductive system i.e. fallopian tubes, ovaries, 
uterus and vaginal canal
18. Bala Strength
19. Balya An energizer that gives strength to the body
20. Bhasma Substance obtained by calcination
21. Basti  It refers to the enema therapy under Panchakarma . Basti  is 
the most effective treatment of Vata  disorder. In Ayurveda  
Basti  involves the introduction of herbal solution and oil 
preparations in the rectum. 
22. Chakhyushya Substances that are good for eyes
23. Churna Powder
24. Chikitsa Treatment, a therapy to retain balance of Doshas , practice or 
science of medicine.
25. Dhatu Basic structural and nutritional body factor that supports or 
nourishes the seven body tissues. These seven tissues of our 
body includes the rasa, Rakta , Mamsa, Meda, Asthi, Majja  and 
Shukra .
26. Deepaniya Natural substances that kindle the gastric fire and augment 
the appetite
27. Dinacharya Daily routine to be followed in day to day practice
28. Dushti Unhappiness, imbalanced, improper functioning
29. Ghrita (Ghee) Clarified butter made by heating unsalted butter from cow 
especially
30. Hina yoga Insufficient, deficient
31. Jala Water
32. Jalauka Leech
33. Jathara Stomach, belly or abdomen
34. Jatharagni Fire located in stomach, digestive fire, gastric juices, 
digestive enzymes
35. Kala Time, period, season
36. Kalka Paste of herbs to be used for medicinal purposes
xxiii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
37. Kapha It is one of the three Doshas  i.e. the water humour, the 
intracellular fluid and the extra cellular fluid that plays 
significant role in the nutrition and existence of body cells 
and tissues
38. Kashaya Astringent taste or flavour; sometimes use for decoction of 
herbs
39. Katu Pungent taste or flavour
40. Kaumarabhrtya The branch of Ayurveda  that deals with child health 
(Paediatrics)
41. Kayachikitsa Internal Medicine, treatment of body diseases, 
42. Kshara Alkali preparations of herbs
43. Kriyakalpa Medical procedures used in eye treatment
44. Laghu Light, small, minute
45. Langhana Depletion therapy, slimming therapy makes body thin and 
light 
46. Lavana Salty taste of flavour
47. Lekhaniya Substances that have scraping actions on body tissues
48. Madhu Honey
49. Majja Bone marrow
50. Mala Waste products that are to be excreted out of the body. It 
primarily includes urine, faeces and sweat
51. Mana Mind
52. Manovaha Srotas The channel that carries thought, feelings and emotions; 
refers to the entire mind
53. Meda It is the fat tissue supported by Mamsa  Dhatu
54. Madhura Sweet taste of flavour, pleasant, charming, delightful
55. Mamsa Muscles and related systems in body
56. Mamsavaha Srotas Channels transporting to the muscles and related tissues
57. Medhya That which enhances wisdom, mental power and intelligence
58. Medovaha Srotas Channels transporting to fat and related tissues
59. Mithyaayoga Wrong use, wrong employment
xxiv  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
60. Mootra /Mutra Urine
61. Mutravaha Srotas Channels transporting to the urinary system
62. Nadi Pulse, any tubular organ such as vein or artery
63. Nadi Vrana Wounds with sinuses
64. Nasya Herbal medication through nasal
65. Netra Eye
66. Netragata Related to eye
67. Nidaana Causes, refers to the etiology or cause of the disease
68. Nidaana Parivarjana Removal or avoiding of causative factors related to the 
disease
69. Nidra Sleep
70. Nija Innate, one’s own, internal
71. Niruha (Basti) An enema of herbal decoctions
72. Ojas Vigour, strength and vitality that is the essence of all tissues 
(Dhatus )
73. Pachaniya Substances that help in proper digestion
74. Panchakarma According to Ayurveda  this refers to the five cleansing 
therapies i.e. Vaman , Virechana , Basti , Nasya  and 
Raktamokshana .
75. Pitta It is one of the three Doshas  i.e. the bile humour, entire 
hormones, enzymes, coenzymes and agencies responsible 
for the physiochemical processes of the body
xxv AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
LIST OF TABLES
SL NO. TABLES PAGE NO.
1 Table 1.1: Types of Kasa with their characteristics 5
2 Table 1.2: Common medicines at level 1 for Kasa 7
3 Table 1.3: Medicines at level 1 for Vataja Kasa 7
4 Table 1.4: Medicines at level 1 for Pittaja Kasa 8
5 Table 1.5: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphaja Kasa 8
6 Table 1.6: Common medicines at level 2 for all type of Kasa 9
7 Table 1.7: Medicines at level 2 for different type of  Kasa 9
8 Table 2.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa 15
9 Table 2.2: Medicines at level 1 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swasa 16
10 Table 2.3: Medicines at level 2 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa 18
11 Table 2.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa 19
12 Table 2.5: Medicines at level 3 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swasa 20
13 Table 3.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amlapitta 28
14 Table 3.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amlapitta 29
15 Table 4.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jalodara 34
16 Table 4.2: Medicines at level 2 for Jalodara 35
17 Table 5.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amavata 42
18 Table 5.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amavata 43
19 Table 5.3: Medicines at level 3 for Amavata 45
20 Table 6.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jwara 48
21 Table 6.2: Management of Jwara as per the Doshik predominance 48
 at level 1.
22 Table 6.3: Clinical features as per Doshik  predominance  49
23 Table 6.4: Clinical features at the level of Dhatus . 50
24 Table 6.5: Management of Jwara at level 2 as per Dhatugata Avastha 50
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES xxvii
LIST OF TABLES
25 Table 6.6: Medicines at level 2 for Jwara 51
26 Table 6.7: Comparative features for various type of Jwara 52
27 Table 6.8: Medicines for Dengue fever 53
28 Table 6.9: Medicines for Influenza  54
29 Table 6.10: Medicines for Malaria 54
30 Table 7.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pandu 59
31 Table 7.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pandu 60
32 Table 8.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ekakushta 65
33 Table 8.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ekakushta 67
34 Table 9.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kamala 70
35 Table 9.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kamala 71
36 Table 10.1: Medicines at level 1 for Hypothyroidism 76
37 Table 10.2: Medicines at level 2 for Hypothyroidism 78
38 Table 10.3: Medicines at level 3 for Hypothyroidism 77
39 Table 11.1: Medicines at level 1 for Madhumeha 80
40 Table 11.2: Medicines at level 2 for Madhumeha 83
41 Table 12.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sthaulya 87
42 Table 12.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sthaulya 89
43 Table 13.1: Types of Arsha with their characteristics 93
44 Table 13.2: Medicines at level 1 for Arsha 94
45 Table 13.3: Medicines at level 2 for Arsha 96
46 Table 14.1: Types of Atisara with their characteristics 99
47 Table 14.2: Medicines at level 1 for Atisara 100
48 Table 14.3: Medicines at level 2 for Atisara   101
49 Table 14.4: Medicines at level 3 for Atisara 102
50 Table 15.1: Types of Bhagandara with their characteristics 104
51 Table 15.2: Another classification of Bhagandara based on  105
 Dosha Samsarga
52 Table 15.3: Medicines at level 1 for Bhagandara 106
53 Table 15.4: Medicines at level 2 for Bhagandara 107
xxviii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESLIST OF TABLES
54 Table 16.1: Medicines at level 1 for Krimi 112
55 Table 16.2: Medicines at level 2 for Krimi 113
56 Table 17.1: Medicines at level 1 for Parikartika 115
57 Table 17.2: Medicines at level 2 for Parikartika 117
58 Table 18.1: Medicines at level 1 for Anidra 123
59 Table 18.2: Medicines at level 2 for Anidra 125
60 Table 19.1: Medicines at level 1 for Apasmara 127
61 Table 19.2: Medicines at level 2 for Apasmara 128
62 Table 19.3: Medicines at level 3 for Apasmara 130
63 Table 20.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vishaada 132
64 Table 20.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vishaada 133
65 Table 21.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ashmari 138
66 Table 21.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ashmari 140
67 Table 22.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mutraghata 144
68 Table 22.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mutraghata 146
69 Table 23.1: Differential diagnosis of Mutrashtila with their 148
 clinical features
70 Table 23.2: Medicines at level 1 for Mutrashtila 149
71 Table 23.3: Medicines at level 2 for Mutrashtila 151
72 Table 24.1: Types of Asrigdara with their characteristics 157
73 Table 24.2: Differential diagnosis of Asrigdara  157
74 Table 24.3: Medicines at level 1 for Asrigdara 158
75 Table 24.4: Medicines at level 2 for Asrigdara 159
76 Table 24.5: Medicines at level 3 for Asrigdara 160
77 Table 25.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kashtaartava 163
78 Table 25.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kashtaartava 164
79 Table 25.3: Basti Dravyas  at level 2 for Kashtaartava 166
80 Table 25.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with heavy bleeding 167
81 Table 25.5: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with scanty bleeding 167
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES xxixLIST OF TABLES
82 Table 26.1: Medicines at level 1 for Shweta Pradara 170
83 Table 26.2: Medicines used for Yoni Prakshalana in Shweta Pradara 171
84 Table 26.3: Medicines used for Yoni Vartia in Shweta Pradara 171
85 Table 26.4: Medicines used for Yoni Pichu in Shweta Pradara 172
86 Table 26.5: Medicines used for Yoni Dhupan in Shweta Pradara 172
87 Table 26.6: Medicines at level 2 for Shweta Pradara 172
88 Table 27.1: Medicines at level 1 for Avabahuka 177
89 Table 27.2: Medicines at level 2 for Avabahuka 179
90 Table 27.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Avabahuka 180
91 Table 28.1: Medicines at level 1 for Katigraha 183
92 Table 28.2: Medicines at level 2 for Katigraha 185
93 Table 28.3: Medicines at level 3 for Katigraha 186
94 Table 28.4: Panchakarma  procedures at level 4 for Katigraha 187
95 Table 29.1: Medicines at level 1 for Gridhrasi 190
96 Table 29.2: Medicines at level 2 for Gridhrasi 192
97 Table 29.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Gridhrasi 193
98 Table 30.1: Differential diagnosis of Pakshaghat  with various  198
 presentations of the diseases 
99 Table 30.2: Medicines at level 1 for Pakshaghat 201
100 Table 30.3: Medicines at level 2 for Pakshaghat 205
101 Table 30.4: Panchakarma procedures at level 3 for Pakshaghat 210
102 Table 31.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sandhivata 215
103 Table 31.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sandhivata 217
104 Table 32.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vatarakta 220
105 Table 32.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vatarakta 222
106 Table 32.3: Rasayana s can be used at level 3 for Vatarakta 223
107 Table 33.1: Differentiating features of common types of conjunctivitis 228
108 Table 33.2: Medicines at level 1 for Abhishyanda 228
109 Table 33.3: Medicines at level 2 for Abhishyanda 231
110 Table 33.4: Shodhana Chikitsa  and other Kriyakalpas  at level 3  232
 for Abhishyanda 
xxx AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESLIST OF TABLES
111 Table 34.1: Medicines at level 2 for Adhimantha 239
112 Table 34.2: Uses of Nasyas in various type of Adhimantha 242
113 Table 34.3: Uses of Tarpana  in various type of Adhimantha 242
114 Table 34.4: Uses of Ashchyotana & Parisheka  in various type of Adhimantha 243
115 Table 34.5: Uses of Anjana  in various type of Adhimantha 243
116 Table 34.6: Uses of Siramokshana  in various type of Adhimantha 243
117 Table 34.7: Uses of Dhumapana  in various type of Adhimantha  243
118 Table 35.1: Medicines at level 1 for Dantaveshtaka 251
119 Table 35.2: Medicines at level 2 for Dantaveshtaka 252
120 Table 35.3: Kriya  Kalpa  / Panchakarma  at level 3 for Dantaveshtaka 253
121 Table 36.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mukhapaka 256
122 Table 36.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mukhapaka 257
123 Table 36.3: Medicines at level 3 for Mukhapaka 258
124 Table 37.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pratishyaya 263
125 Table 37.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pratishyaya 264
126 Table 38.1: Clinical features of different types of Shiroroga  270
127 Table 38.2: Medicines at level 1 for Shiroroga 271
128 Table 38.3: Medicines at level 2 for Shiroroga 272
129 Table 38.4: Medicines at level 3 for Shiroroga 273
INDEX
1 Foreword x
2 Message from Minister xii
3 Preface xiv
4 Acknowledgement xvi
5 Abbreviation xviii
6 Glossary xxii
7 List of Tables xxvi
NO. CHAPTERS PAGES
INTROD UCTION 1
PRANAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
1 Kasa 5
2 Tamaka Swasa 14
ANNAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
3 Amlapitta 27
UDAKAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
4 Jalodara 33
RASAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
5 Amavata 41
6 Jwara 47
7 Pandu 58
RAKTAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
8 Ekakushtha 65
9 Kamala 69
MEDOVAHA SROTAS ROGA
10 Hypothyroidism 75
11 Madhumeha 79
12 Sthoulya 86
PURISHAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
13 Arsha 93
14 Atisara 99
xxxii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESINDEX
15 Bhagandara 104
16 Krimi 109
17 Parikartika 113
MANOVAHA SROTAS ROGA
18 Anidra 121
19 Apasmara 125
20 Vishada 129
MUTRAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
21 Ashmari 137
22 Mutraghata 142
23 Mutrasthila 148
ARTAVAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
24 Asrigdara 157
25 Kashtaarthava 162
26 Shwetapradara 169
VATA VYADHI
27 Avabahuka 177
28 Katigraha 182
29 Gridhrasi 189
30 Pakshaghata 196
31 Sandhigata Vata 215
32 Vatarakta 220
NETRAGATA ROGA
33 Abhishyanda 227
34 Adhimantha 237
URDHWA JATRUGATA ROGA
35 Dantavestaka 251
36 Mukhapaka 255
37 Pratishyaya 261
38 Shiroroga 270
APPENDIX -
 Atura Pariksha Patrak 277

Copies may be obtained from: 
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH)
Government of IndiaAYUSH BHAWANB Block, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi-110023, IndiaTelefax: 011-24651964Website: www.ayush.gov.in
First Edition, 2017
© Copyright 2017, ministry of ayush, government of india. Any part of this document may be 
reproduced, copied or adapted to meet local needs, without permission from ministry of ayush, 
provided that the parts reproduced are not tinkered and are distributed free of charge or at no 
cost – not for profit.  
Published and funded by: 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, New Delhi, India
Printing coordinated by: 
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth
(Under Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India)Dhanwantari Bhawan, Road No 66, 
Punjabi Bagh (West), New Delhi-110026, India
Phone: 011-25228548Telefax: 011-25229753Website: www.ravidyapeethdelhi.com
Design and Printing By:
M/s  Graphic Printers
2965/41, Beadon Pura, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005
Email:graphicprinters26@gmail.com
Ayurvedic Standard  
Treatment Guidelines
A document prepared by  
Ministry of AYUSH  
Government of India  
Executive Editor
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Adviser (Ay)  
Ministry of AYUSH
AYUSH BHAWAN
B Block, GPO Complex,
INA, New Delhi-110023, India
Collaborative Institutes 
Institute for Postgraduate Teaching &  
Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar 
and 
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur


Executive Editor
Vaidya Manoj Nesari,
Adviser (Ay)  
Ministry of AYUSH, Govt of India, New Delhi
Editors
Professor M. S. Baghel
Former Director, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
Professor Anup  Thakar
Director, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
Dr. S. K. Khandel
Former Head, Dept. of Roga Nidan, NIA, Jaipur
Dr. Pawan Godatwar
Professor, Dept. of Roga Nidan, NIA, Jaipur
Dr. Prakash Mangalasseri
Associate Professor, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, VPSV Ayurveda College,  
Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala
Coordinator
Dr. Mandip Goyal
Associate Professor, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
Peer Reviewers: 
1. Professor Gurdip Singh, Former 
Director, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
2. Professor R.  H. Singh, Professor 
Emeritus, Faculty of Ayurveda BHU, Varanasi
3. Professor R. B. Dwivedi, Former Director & Head, Dept. of Basic Principles, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
4. Professor Abhimanyu Kumar, Director, 
AIIA, New Delhi
5. Professor H. M. Chandola, Former Director/ Principal, CBPACS, Najafgarh, 
New Delhi6. Dr. S. N. Gupta, Head, Dept. of 
Kayachikitsa, J. S. Ayurveda College, 
Nadiad –Gujarat
7. Professor Tanuja Nesari, Head, Dept. of 
Dravyaguna, AIIA, New Delhi
8. Professor Meeta Kotecha, Head, Dept. of Dravyaguna, NIA, Jaipur
9. Professor Mahesh Chandra Sharma, Former Director, NIA, Jaipur
10. Dr. Haridra Dave, Head, Dept. of Shalakya Tantra, J. S. Ayurveda College, 
Nadiad -Gujarat 
vi AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 
11. Dr. B. M. Singh, Dept. of Kaumarbhritya, 
Faculty of Ayurveda, BHU, Varanasi
12. Dr. Ved Prakash Vyas, Dept. of Bal  
Roga, Govt. Dhanwantri Ayurved 
College, Ujjain
13. Dr. Eswar Sarma, Principal, VPSV 
Ayurveda College, Edarikkode, 
Kottakal, Kerala
14. Dr. P. Rammanohar, Research Director, 
Amrita Center for Advanced Research 
in Ayurveda, Amritapuri, Kerala
15. Professor A. K. Tripathi, Director, 
Ayurved and Unani Services, Dehradun, 
Uttarakhand
16. Dr. M. M. Padhi, Deputy Director, 
CCRAS, New Delhi
17. Dr. D. K. Dwivedi, S. R. M. Government Ayurveda College and Hospital, Bareilly 
Dept. of Surgery Uttar Pradesh
18. Dr. Kishor Sinh Chudasama, Former 
Principal, Sheth J. P. Govt. College, 
Bhavnagar, Gujarat
19. Dr. Srinivas Acharya, Professor & 
Head – Dept. of Kayachikitsa, Sri 
Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara 
College of Ayurveda, P. O. Kuthpady, Udupi, Karnataka
20. Vd. Tapan Vaidya, Associate Professor Dept. of Kayachikitsa, J.S. Ayurveda 
College, Nadiad – Gujarat
21. Professor Manda Ghorpade, Professor, 
H.O.D. Streeroga Prasutitantra 
Dept, Sumatibhai Shalu Ayurved 
Mahavidyalaya Hadapsar, Pune, Maharashtra22. Dr. Jayant Deopujari, Consultant, Shrinidhi Ayurveda Panchakarma 
Chikitsalaya, Nagpur, Maharashtra
23. Dr. Manoj A. K., Professor, Dept. of 
Panchakarma, VPSV Ayurveda College, 
Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala.
24. Professor Umesh Shukla, Principal, 
Pt. Khushilal Sharma Government 
Ayurveda College, Bhopal
25. Dr. B. L. Mehra, HOD Kayachikitsa, 
R.G. Govt. Ayurvedic College, Paprola, 
Kangra (H.P.) 
26. Dr. Rakesh Sharma, Reader, Dept 
of Balaroga PG Section, R.G. Govt. 
Ayurvedic College, Paprola, Kangra 
(H.P.)
27. Dr. Sasikumar, Nechiyil Ayurveda Vaidyasala and Nursing Home, 
Karalmana, Palakkad, Kerala
28. Professor Y. K. Sharma, Principal cum 
Dean & HOD – Kayachikitsa, Rajiv 
Gandhi Govt Ayurvedic College, 
Paprola, Distt. – Kangra, Himachal Pradesh
29. Dr VNK Usha, Dept. of Dtree roga and Prasuti tantra, SDM college of Ayurveda, 
P.O. Kuthpady, Udupi, Karnataka
30. Dr A R V Murthy, Dean & Medical 
Superintendent, Atreya Ayurvedic 
Medical College, Hospital & Research 
Center, Doddaballapura, Bangalore
31. Dr. Vijay Chaudhary, Reader – Kayachikitsa, Rajiv Gandhi Govt 
Ayurvedic College, Paprola, Distt. – 
Kangra, Himanchal Pradash
 
vii                                                                               AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  32. Dr. Mukund Sabnis, Consultant, 
Jeevan Rekha Ayurved Chikitsalaya 
and Research Center, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra
33. Dr. Bharti, Assistant Director-In-Charge, Central Ayurveda Research Institute for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, CCRAS, New 
Delhi
34. Dr. Renu Singh, Research Officer (Ayu), CCRAS, New Delhi
35. Professor Ena Sharma, Head, Dept. of PTSR, Rajiv Gandhi Govt. Ayurveda 
College, Paprola, Distt. – Kangra, 
Himachal Pradesh
36. Dr. Prashantha A. S., Professor, Ayurved Mahavidyalaya and Hospital, Hubli, 
Karnataka
37. Professor Vishnuprasad Sharma,  
Department of Kayachikitsa, Govern-ment Ayurvedic college and Hospital,  
Guwahati
38. Dr. Neru Nathani, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Swasthavritta and Yoga, 
Faculty of Ayurveda, Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi39. Dr. Dinesh K S, Asst. Professor, Dept. 
of Kaumar Bhritya, VPSV Ayurveda College, Edarikkode, Kottakal, Kerala
40. Dr. A. R. Trivedi, Former, HOD, Kaumarbhritya, Shri Gulab Kunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, Gujarat
41. Dr. Girish K.J., Reader, Dept. of Kayachikitsa, SDM College of  
Ayurveda, BM Road, Thanniruhalla, Hassan, Karnataka
42. Dr. Govind Reddy, Research officer (Ayu), In-charge, R.R.A. Podar, Central Ayurveda Research institute for Cancer, Mumbai.
43. Dr. Manohar Gundeti, Research officer (Ayu) R.R.A. Podar, Central Ayurveda Research institute for cancer, Mumbai
44. Dr. Bhavana Prasher, Ayurved Scientist, IGIB, New Delhi
45. Dr. Rakhi Mehra, Former Assistant Director-In-charge, Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases, CCRAS, New Delhi
Subject experts and Contributors  – 
1. Professor P. K. Prajapati, Dean, All India 
Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
2. Professor Kalpana Patel, Prof & HOD, Kaumarabhritya, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
3. Professor Dhiman K., Director General, 
CCRAS, New Delhi4. Professor Sanjay Gupta, Dept. of  
Shalya, All India Institute of Ayurveda, 
New Delhi
5. Professor L. P. Dei, In-charge Director, 
HOD, Stree Roga and Prasutitantra, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, Gujarat
6. Professor Manjusha Rajgopala,  HOD, 
Shalakya, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
 
viii AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES7. Professor K. S. Nisteshwar, ex HOD, 
Dravyaguna, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
8. Professor S. H. Acharya, Pachakarma 
Dept, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, Gujarat
9. Professor M. K. Vyas, HOD, Basic Principles, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
10. Professor R. N. Acharya, HOD, 
Dravyaguna, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
11. Professor B. J. Patgiri, HOD, Rasashastra 
& Bhaishjya Kalpana, IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar
12. Dr. A. S. Baghel, In-charge HOD, 
Associate Professor, Dept. of Basic 
Principles, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
13. Dr. Hitesh Vyas, Associate Prof, Basic 
Principles, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, Gujarat
14. Dr. Galib, Associate Professor, Rasashastra & Bhaishjya Kalpana, All 
India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
15. Dr. T. S. Dudhamal, In-charge HOD, 
Associate Professor, Dept. of Shalya, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
16. Dr. D. B. Vaghela, In-charge HOD, 
Associate Professor, Dept. of Shalakya, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar
17. Dr. Rajgopala S, Associate Professor, 
Kaumarabhitya, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi
18. Dr. Shilpa Donga, Associate Professor, 
Stree Roga and Prasutitanta, IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
19. Dr A R Dave, In-charge HOD, Associate 
Professor, Kayachikitsa, IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat20. Dr. Darshana Pandya, Assistant 
Professor, Roga Nidan, IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
21. Dr. B. R. Patel, Assistant Professor, 
Dravyaguna, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
22. Dr. Rajkala Ramteke, Research Officer 
(Ayu), Central Ayurveda Research 
Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases, 
CCRAS, New Delhi
23. Dr. Prashant Bedarkar, Assistant Prof, Rasashastra & Bhaishjya Kalpana, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, Gujarat
24. Dr V. K. Kori, Associate Professor, 
Kaumarabhritya, IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
25. Dr. Vyasdeo Mahanta, Associate 
Professor, Dept. of Shalya, All India 
Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi, 
Gujarat
26. Dr. Shubhangi Kamble Assistant Professor, Dept. of Basic Principles, 
IPGT&RA, Jamnagar, Gujarat
27. Dr. Nilesh Bhatt, Assistant Professor, 
Dept. of Kayachikitsa, IPGT&RA, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat
28. Dr. Arpan Bhatt, HOD, Dept. of 
Swasthvritta, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
29. Dr. Neha Tank, Reader, Dept. of Panchakarma, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
30. Dr. Pashmina Joshi, HOD, Reader, Dept. of Shalya, Shri Gulab Kunverba Ayurved 
Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, Gujarat
31. Dr. Rajshree Undakat, HOD, Reader, 
Dept. of Shalakya, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
32. Dr. Varsha Solanki, HOD, Reader, Dept. of Dravyaguna, Shri Gulab Kunverba 
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar, 
Gujarat
33. Dr. Harshit Shah, Dept. of Shalya Tantra, Akhandanand Ayurveda College, Opp. 
Victoria Garden Bhadra, Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat 
34. Dr. Kamini Dhiman, Associate Professor, Dept. of Stree roga and Prasutitanta, 
AIIA, New Delhi
35. Dr. Gurucharan Bhuyan, Research 
officer (Ay), CCRAS Hq. New Delhi36. Dr. Ashu Vinayak, Reader, Dept. of Shalakya Tantra, Shri Krishna Govt. 
Ayurvedic College & Hospital, Umri 
Road, Near DC Residence, Sec-8, Kurukshetra-136118, Haryana
37. Dr. Shantla Priyadarshini, Reader, Dept. of Shalakya, Sri Jai Chamrajendra 
Wadeyar Govt. Ayurveda Medical 
College, Mysore, Karnataka
38. Dr P. K. Shanthakumari, Retd. Professor, Matha Ayurveda Eye Hospital, 
Jayprakash Lane, Pokudappanakunnu, 
Thiruvanathpuram, Kerala
39. Dr. Shivanad Gavimath, Dept. of Shalakya, J. S. S. Ayurved Hospital, 
Mysore, Karnataka
ix AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES
FOREWORD
In last twenty years or so Ayurveda sector has witnessed gradual upsurge globally. 
The personalized medicine approach of Ayurveda and the huge diversity in Ayurvedic 
formulations have always been glorified by supporters of Ayurveda including practitioners 
and scientists. At the same time the same strengths have been used by others as impediments for its wider implementation at public health. The National Health Policy 2017 of India has 
strongly recommended for integrating Ayurveda in main health care delivery. The health 
policy has focussed on attaining sustainable development goals 3 (SDG 3) identified by United Nations (UN). The Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India in an effort to streamline the 
implementation of Ayurveda services, has developed Ayurvedic Essential Drug List (EDL). 
The issue of quality of Ayurvedic drugs is also being addressed by developing Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Development of Ayurvedic Standard Treatment Guidelines is the 
next step in standardising the Ayurveda services and their mainstreaming in Public Health. 
The work of developing this document has been going on for over two years. It has gone 
through wider consultation involving experts of different Ayurvedic subjects across the country. 
Ayurveda practices in different part of country have lot of diversity owing to availability of 
local natural resources as well as local Vaidya traditions. The major challenge faced was to 
arrive at consensus on Ayurvedic formulations to be prescribed for different disease conditions 
with respect to available Clinical Infrastructure i.e. PHC/CHC/ DH. There were also issues 
in identifying nearest correlation between Ayurvedic understandings of various disease conditions with their allopathy counterpart. The scientists and experts having understanding 
of both systems would understand easily the difficulties underlying. 
The guidelines are neither prescriptive nor restrictive but are more facilitative in nature. The 
guidelines doesn’t restrict Ayurveda practitioners for using various formulations as per their 
wisdom, knowledge of Ayurveda and experience. This is a maiden effort to extract the wider 
scope of Ayurveda practices and accommodate them in to a relatively restrictive format. For this purpose 40 most common disease conditions commonly found in general practice have 
been shortlisted. The format have been developed considering the available infrastructure and 
resources at primary health center (PHC) where only OPD facility is available, Community health Center (CHC) having 20 beds and District Hospital (DH) which has 50 beds and good 
diagnostic labs. While developing this document efforts have been made to explain the case 
and treatment on Ayurvedic principles and thereby to retain the soul of Ayurveda. At the same 
 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  xitime conventional terminology has been used so that the document should be easy understand 
for every stakeholder. The introduction and case definition explained at the beginning of every 
disease condition narrates the clinical condition making it easy to understand to all stake 
holders. The references in support of treatment recommended have been listed in scientific manner at the end of every chapter. Thus, an effort has been made to make these guidelines 
more scientific and practical for implementation. The document will be useful not only to 
young Ayurveda graduates but also could be useful to supporting staff and non-Ayurveda practitioners so as to reach to the last person in the society to realize the dream and intention 
of ‘Health for All” of the Government. The document, first of its kind would also be useful to 
policy makers in future policy making, to regulators for promoting good Ayurveda services as well as to Insurance sector to provide wider coverage to Ayurveda treatment and services. The 
document would also be useful in Government’s drive for promoting Ayurveda based Medical 
and Wellness Tourism. 
The document has undergone nearly six reviews to eliminate any kind of discrepancy. However, 
Ministry would welcome suggestions or further improvements, which in consultation with 
experts and after authentication could be accommodated in next edition.  
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Adviser (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH and 
Executive Editor.



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
Ayurveda is the most ancient system of medicine of Indian origin and is equally relevant in 
modern times. It is the knowledge base of life which, in addition to description of clinical profile 
of diseases, various etiological factors – primary or secondary, the etio-pathogenesis, different 
stages of disease progression, stage wise medical intervention, the prognosis and all such other clinical details; has also described in detail the dietary substances, various physical and mental 
activities, role of various epigenetic factors, methods for promotion of health, Community and 
social medicine etc. Ayurveda has also emphasised on social and spiritual wellbeing. The beauty of Ayurveda lies in the flexibility it has provided to clinicians in application part i.e. choice of 
medicinal plants, drug formulations, dosage forms etc. which may vary depending upon the 
availability of raw material according to geo-climatic conditions without compromising with the fundamental principles.  
India is bestowed with rich bio-diversity. The Himalayan ranges, North east India, Western 
Ghats from Gujarat and extending up to southern tip of India in Kerala are bio-diversity hotspots. Around 6000 plant varieties are found in India, out of which 600 are commonly 
used. But that doesn’t mean that other are not used at all. Certain varieties are used in 
certain pockets depending upon the traditions. Some medicinal plants entered in to main stream Ayurvedic practice through folklore practices are also within the ambit of Ayurvedic 
principles. According to Ayurveda principles every substance available on earth has some or 
the other medicinal property. At the same time, Ayurveda has also described the mechanism of adopting various natural resources in to main stream practice. Many Vaidya traditions have 
some unique specialties of practices those have traversed through generations in their family. Most of them have come from their long standing observations, understanding and experience. Often, a medicinal plant or part thereof has many medicinal uses; out of those some could be 
popular where as some may not. Apparently, one may find strange the unpopular use, but 
may find their mention in ancient classical text. For e.g. plant parts like leaf, bark, stem, roots are commonly used in Ayurvedic medicines. However, flowers are not frequently used. This is 
because, they are season specific and perishable and also difficult to store. 
In India, Ayurveda education and clinical practices are regulated under Indian Medicine 
Central Council Act, 1970 whereas; Ayurveda drugs are regulated under Drugs & Cosmetics 

 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  xv
Act, 1940 and Rules 1945. Enrolment of Ayurveda Clinical practitioners in State Register is 
regulated under State (Provincial) Ayurveda Practitioners Acts of relevant States. Uniformity 
of curricula and syllabi of graduation level degree course and Post Graduate degree courses in 
various specialties has been maintained throughout the country. However, there is also wide diversity observed in the prescriptions of Vaidyas in different parts of the country, which is 
within the broad frame work of Ayurveda practices recognized under different legislative provisions in force. 
As per the market trends, currently Ayurveda practices are gradually shifting on pharma based 
products readily available in market. Nevertheless, few Vaidyas continue to prepare classical 
medicines on their own and also have their own formulations. This is very much legal as per 
the provisions under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Ayurveda practices are not only the prescriptions of medicines but also include various 
procedures. They include Panchakarma procedures, Marma Therapy, Viddha Karma, Agni Karma, 
Upakalpana, dietary preparations etc. 
With the onset of National Health Mission (NHM) in the year 2005, Ayurveda received major boost towards mainstreaming in public health through which, Ayurveda services are being made available at Primary Health Centres as well as at District Hospitals. In the year 2014, the 
then Department of AYUSH under Ministry of Health and family Welfare was elevated to a 
separate Ministry making clear that Ayurveda is one of the thrust area identified by Government towards major reforms in the developing New India. This started a new era for major upsurge 
for Ayurveda nationwide. These efforts are further augmented by the Ministry of AYUSH 
with the implementation of National AYUSH Mission (NAM). Presently, Ayurveda services are available in nearly 40% of PHCs throughout the country. At the same time, there is also rise 
of Ayurveda infrastructure in private sector. The Ministry of AYUSH has also encouraged for 
development of tertiary care through Ayurveda. Development All India Institute of Ayurveda at New Delhi is a major milestone in this regard. Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
has also encouraged private sector to develop tertiary care services through Ayurveda. As a 
result, few Ayurveda specialty hospitals have come up in private sector in recent past. There is increasing trend in well reputed allopathy corporate hospitals to start Ayurveda wing. 
With this background, it was felt necessary to develop an authentic document which could 
provide some basic guidelines about Ayurvedic practices. The present document would be useful not only to Ayurveda practitioners but also to regulators, policy makers as well as to 
International community in supporting Ayurveda practices. 
Vaidya Manoj Nesari  Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
 Developing the Ayurvedic St andard Treatment Guidelines was a stiff task considering 
the diversity in the choice of medicines and the regional variation and also considering that 
all of them are scientific and are based on Ayurvedic principles. Therefore, the task was primarily assigned to “Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda”, (IPGT&RA) Jamnagar and “National Institute of Ayurveda”, (NIA) Jaipur. Both these are top-notch premier institutes of Ayurveda having international repute. I am highly indebted to Directors and faculty of these institutes for whole heartedly supporting in this endeavour. This being the maiden document, took long time for completion. The initial phase was more crucial wherein the template and skeletal content were to be framed. It involved lot of energy. This could have been possible because of dynamic leadership of Prof. M.S. Baghel, the then Director of IPGT&RA, Jamnagar and strongly supported by Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, the then Vice Chancellor of Gujarat Ayurveda University and presently Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of AYUSH. I am also thankful to Prof. Sanjeev Sharma, the current Director of NIA Jaipur, for his support in the last and final phase of completing this document. The coordination of the project was skilfully handled by Dr. Mandip Goyal, Associate Prof. of Kayachikitsa, IPGT & RA Jamnagar. Dr. Prakash Mangalasseri, Associate Prof. Kayachikitsa, Ayurveda College Kottakal had always been resourceful and supportive for getting the job completed. 
 Senior faculty from nearly 32 Ayurveda Institutes including Faculty of Ayurveda, 
Banaras Hindu University; Ayurveda College, Kottakal; Ch. Brahm Prakash Ayurved Charak Sansthan New Delhi; Tilak Ayurveda College; Pune; R. R. A.Podar,Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Cancer, Mumbai; SDM Ayurveda College, Hassan; SDM Ayurveda College Udupi; Ayurveda College Belgaum etc. were involved in developing this document. Their names and specialty has been listed under list of contributors. The responsibility of designing, proof checking etc. and getting the printed this document was assigned to Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, New Delhi. Mr. N. Ramakrishnan, A.O. RAV and Dr. Varun Gupta efficiently handled this responsibility to complete the task in time bound manner.  
 Most importantly I am grateful to Sh. Shripad Naik, Hon’ble Minister of State, 
Independent Charge for Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India for his vision, guidance and continuous support. 
Vaidya Manoj Nesari
Adviser (Ay)


ABBREVIATIONS
2D Echo  2 dimensional Echo
ABC  Airway, breathing, circulation
AFB  Acid-Fast Bacilli
ALT  Alanine transaminase
ANA  Anti-Nuclear Antibody
ASO  Antistreptolysis ‘O’ titer
AST  Aspartate Aminotransferase
Ay/Ayu  Ayurveda
AYUSH  Collective name for Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha & Homeopathy
BMD  Bone Mineral Density
BMI  Body mass index
BP Blood Pressure
BPH  Benign Prostrate Hyper-trophy
BSL Blood sugar level
BT Bleeding time
Ca Calcium
CBC  Complete blood count
CHC  Community Health Center
COPD  Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CRP  C-reactive protein
CT Scan  computed tomography  scan
CVA  Cerebro - Vascular Accident
DLC  Differential leucocyte counts
DM Diabetes Mellitus
DMARD  Disease modifying anti rheumatic drugs
Ed. or ed.  Edition
ECG  Electro cardio gram
EEG  Electro Encphalogram
ESR Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
FT3 Free Triiodothyronine  
FT4 Free Thyroxine
GFR  Glomerular Filtration Rate
GI or GIT  Gastro Intestinal Tract
gm%  Gram percent
Govt.  Government
GTT  Glucose Tolerance Test
H1N1  Swine flu - subtype of the Influenza A virus
H5N1  Bird Flu - subtype of the Influenza A virus
Hb Haemoglobin
HbA1c  Glycated Haemoglobin
HBsAg  Australia antigen - surface antigen of the Hepatitis B virus
HDL  High-density lipoprotein
HIV   Human immune-deficiency virus
IC  Intra cranial
ICA Islet cell Autoantibody
IgG Immunoglobulin G antibody
IgM Immunoglobulin M antibody
IHD  Ischemic heart disease
ILD Interstitial Lung Disease
IOP Intraocular pressure  
ISM&H  Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
IVP Intravenous Pyelogram
IVU Intravenous Urogram
K Potassium
KSS Kshar Sutra Suturing
xix AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
KUB  Collective name for Kidney, Ureter and Bladder
LDL  Low-density lipoprotein
LFT Liver Function Test
LPD  Lymphoproliferative Disease
MRI scan  Magnetic resonance imaging  
Na Sodium
NS1 Antigen-Based ELISA  Test  for Dengue
OCT  Optical coherence tomography
OPD  Out Patient Department
PA view  Postero-Anterior view
PACG  Primary Angle-Closure Glaucoma
PCOD  polycystic Ovarian Disease
PCOS  Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
PCR  Polymerase chain reaction
PHC  Primary Health Centre
PNS  Paranasal sinuses
POAG  Primary open angle glaucoma
P/R  Per rectal
PPBS  Post prandial blood sugar
PSA  Prostate-specific antigen
PUI Platelet Uptake Index
Q.S. Quantity sufficient
RA Rheumatoid arthritis
RFT Renal Function test
RIND  Reversible ischemic neurological deficit
S. or Sr.  Serum
SLR test  Straight leg raised test
T3 Triiodothyronine  
T4 Thyroxine
xx AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
Tab Tablet
TB Tuberculosis
TIA Transient Ischaemic Attack
TLC  Total Leucocyte Counts
TRUS  Trans Rectal Ultra Sonography
TSH  Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
tsp teaspoon
U/Lit  Unit per Litre
USG  Ultra Sonography
UTI Urinary Tract Infection
VDRL test  Venereal Disease Research Laboratory  test 
Vol. Volume
xxi AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABBREVIATIONS
GLOSSARY
1. Abhyanga  An Ayurvedic oil massage practice. This helps loosen and 
facilitate the removal of accumulated Ama (toxins) and the 
Doshas (Vata , Pitta  and Kapha) from the body.
2. Aadharniya vega  Non-suppression of natural urges It means the natural urges which should not be suppressed by force as a habit.
3. Aschyotana  Type of eye treatment in which drops of herbal liquids are put into the eyes.
4. Agantuka  External factor
5. Ajirna/ Ajeerna  Indigestion, weak digestion
6. Amla  Sour taste
7. Anna-vaha srotas  The channels transporting grains or food, the digestive system, alimentary canal.
8. Anupana  Vehicle for medicine
9. Anuvasana (Basti)  Enema given with an oily substance
10. Apana  One of the five types of Vata , which goes downward and is 
responsible for expulsion of faces, flatus, urine, menstrual 
blood etc.
11. Asatmya  Unwholesome, bad, improper.
12. Agni  Agni is the form of fire and heat that is the basis of the 
digestive system and the process of release of energy. The 
term includes the body heat, body temperature, sight, the 
digestive fire; its function is transformation, absorption, elimination and discrimination is Agni.
13. Ahara  Food articles used by human
14. Ahara Rasa  It is the nutrient substance developed after digestion process taken in the digestive tract where enzymes or the bile juice 
acted upon food articles
15. Ama  Toxins or Ama is produced in the body by the raw, undigested 
food products that become fetid.
16. Artava  Menstrual blood
17. Artavavaha Srotas  The channel that carries menstrual fluid and ovum; consists 
of female reproductive system i.e. fallopian tubes, ovaries, 
uterus and vaginal canal
18. Bala Strength
19. Balya  An energizer that gives strength to the body
20. Bhasma  Substance obtained by calcination
21. Basti  It refers to the enema therapy under Panchakarma . Basti is 
the most effective treatment of Vata  disorder. In Ayurveda 
Basti involves the introduction of herbal solution and oil 
preparations in the rectum.  
22. Chakhyushya  Substances that are good for eyes
23. Churna  Powder
24. Chikitsa  Treatment, a therapy to retain balance of Doshas, practice or 
science of medicine.
25. Dhatu  Basic structural and nutritional body factor that supports or 
nourishes the seven body tissues. These seven tissues of our 
body includes the rasa, Rakta, Mamsa, Meda, Asthi, Majja  and 
Shukra.
26. Deepaniya  Natural substances that kindle the gastric fire and augment 
the appetite
27. Dinacharya  Daily routine to be followed in day to day practice
28. Dushti  Unhappiness, imbalanced, improper functioning
29. Ghrita (Ghee)  Clarified butter made by heating unsalted butter from cow especially
30. Hina yoga  Insufficient, deficient
31. Jala Water
32. Jalauka  Leech
33. Jathara  Stomach, belly or abdomen
34. Jatharagni  Fire located in stomach, digestive fire, gastric juices, digestive enzymes
35. Kala Time, period, season
36. Kalka  Paste of herbs to be used for medicinal purposes
xxiii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
37. Kapha  It is one of the three Doshas i.e. the water humour, the 
intracellular fluid and the extra cellular fluid that plays 
significant role in the nutrition and existence of body cells 
and tissues
38. Kashaya  Astringent taste or flavour; sometimes use for decoction of herbs
39. Katu  Pungent taste or flavour
40. Kaumarabhrtya  The branch of Ayurveda that deals with child health 
(Paediatrics)
41. Kayachikitsa  Internal Medicine, treatment of body diseases, 
42. Kshara  Alkali preparations of herbs
43. Kriyakalpa  Medical procedures used in eye treatment
44. Laghu  Light, small, minute
45. Langhana  Depletion therapy, slimming therapy makes body thin and 
light  
46. Lavana  Salty taste of flavour
47. Lekhaniya  Substances that have scraping actions on body tissues
48. Madhu  Honey
49. Majja  Bone marrow
50. Mala  Waste products that are to be excreted out of the body. It primarily includes urine, faeces and sweat
51. Mana  Mind
52. Manovaha Srotas  The channel that carries thought, feelings and emotions; refers to the entire mind
53. Meda  It is the fat tissue supported by Mamsa  Dhatu
54. Madhura  Sweet taste of flavour, pleasant, charming, delightful
55. Mamsa  Muscles and related systems in body
56. Mamsavaha Srotas  Channels transporting to the muscles and related tissues
57. Medhya  That which enhances wisdom, mental power and intelligence
58. Medovaha Srotas  Channels transporting to fat and related tissues
59. Mithyaayoga  Wrong use, wrong employment
xxiv  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
60. Mootra /Mutra  Urine
61. Mutravaha Srotas  Channels transporting to the urinary system
62. Nadi  Pulse, any tubular organ such as vein or artery
63. Nadi Vrana  Wounds with sinuses
64. Nasya  Herbal medication through nasal
65. Netra  Eye
66. Netragata  Related to eye
67. Nidaana  Causes, refers to the etiology or cause of the disease
68. Nidaana Parivarjana  Removal or avoiding of causative factors related to the 
disease
69. Nidra  Sleep
70. Nija Innate, one’s own, internal
71. Niruha (Basti)  An enema of herbal decoctions
72. Ojas  Vigour, strength and vitality that is the essence of all tissues (Dhatus)
73. Pachaniya  Substances that help in proper digestion
74. Panchakarma  According to Ayurveda this refers to the five cleansing therapies i.e. Vaman , Virechana, Basti, Nasya and 
Raktamokshana .
75. Pitta  It is one of the three Doshas i.e. the bile humour, entire 
hormones, enzymes, coenzymes and agencies responsible 
for the physiochemical processes of the body
xxv AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGLOSSARY
LIST OF TABLES
SL NO.  TABLES  PAGE NO.
1 Table 1.1: Types of Kasa with their characteristics  5
2 Table 1.2: Common medicines at level 1 for Kasa  7
3 Table 1.3: Medicines at level 1 for Vataja Kasa  7
4 Table 1.4: Medicines at level 1 for Pittaja Kasa  8
5 Table 1.5: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphaja Kasa  8
6 Table 1.6: Common medicines at level 2 for all type of Kasa  9
7 Table 1.7: Medicines at level 2 for different type of  Kasa  9
8 Table 2.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa  15
9 Table 2.2: Medicines at level 1 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swasa  16
10 Table 2.3: Medicines at level 2 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa  18
11 Table 2.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa  19
12 Table 2.5: Medicines at level 3 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swasa  20
13 Table 3.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amlapitta  28
14 Table 3.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amlapitta  29
15 Table 4.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jalodara  34
16 Table 4.2: Medicines at level 2 for Jalodara  35
17 Table 5.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amavata  42
18 Table 5.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amavata  43
19 Table 5.3: Medicines at level 3 for Amavata  45
20 Table 6.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jwara  48
21 Table 6.2: Management of Jwara as per the Doshik predominance  48
 at level 1.
22 Table 6.3: Clinical features as per Doshik  predominance  49
23 Table 6.4: Clinical features at the level of Dhatus . 50
24 Table 6.5: Management of Jwara at level 2 as per Dhatugata Avastha  50
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  xxvii
LIST OF TABLES
25 Table 6.6: Medicines at level 2 for Jwara  51
26 Table 6.7: Comparative features for various type of Jwara  52
27 Table 6.8: Medicines for Dengue fever  53
28 Table 6.9: Medicines for Influenza  54
29 Table 6.10: Medicines for Malaria  54
30 Table 7.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pandu  59
31 Table 7.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pandu  60
32 Table 8.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ekakushta  65
33 Table 8.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ekakushta  67
34 Table 9.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kamala  70
35 Table 9.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kamala  71
36 Table 10.1: Medicines at level 1 for Hypothyroidism  76
37 Table 10.2: Medicines at level 2 for Hypothyroidism  78
38 Table 10.3: Medicines at level 3 for Hypothyroidism  77
39 Table 11.1: Medicines at level 1 for Madhumeha  80
40 Table 11.2: Medicines at level 2 for Madhumeha  83
41 Table 12.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sthaulya  87
42 Table 12.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sthaulya  89
43 Table 13.1: Types of Arsha with their characteristics  93
44 Table 13.2: Medicines at level 1 for Arsha  94
45 Table 13.3: Medicines at level 2 for Arsha  96
46 Table 14.1: Types of Atisara with their characteristics  99
47 Table 14.2: Medicines at level 1 for Atisara  100
48 Table 14.3: Medicines at level 2 for Atisara   101
49 Table 14.4: Medicines at level 3 for Atisara  102
50 Table 15.1: Types of Bhagandara with their characteristics  104
51 Table 15.2: Another classification of Bhagandara based on  105
 Dosha Samsarga
52 Table 15.3: Medicines at level 1 for Bhagandara  106
53 Table 15.4: Medicines at level 2 for Bhagandara  107
xxviii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESLIST OF TABLES
54 Table 16.1: Medicines at level 1 for Krimi  112
55 Table 16.2: Medicines at level 2 for Krimi  113
56 Table 17.1: Medicines at level 1 for Parikartika  115
57 Table 17.2: Medicines at level 2 for Parikartika  117
58 Table 18.1: Medicines at level 1 for Anidra  123
59 Table 18.2: Medicines at level 2 for Anidra  125
60 Table 19.1: Medicines at level 1 for Apasmara  127
61 Table 19.2: Medicines at level 2 for Apasmara  128
62 Table 19.3: Medicines at level 3 for Apasmara  130
63 Table 20.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vishaada  132
64 Table 20.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vishaada  133
65 Table 21.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ashmari  138
66 Table 21.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ashmari  140
67 Table 22.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mutraghata  144
68 Table 22.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mutraghata  146
69 Table 23.1: Differential diagnosis of Mutrashtila with their  148
 clinical features
70 Table 23.2: Medicines at level 1 for Mutrashtila  149
71 Table 23.3: Medicines at level 2 for Mutrashtila  151
72 Table 24.1: Types of Asrigdara with their characteristics  157
73 Table 24.2: Differential diagnosis of Asrigdara  157
74 Table 24.3: Medicines at level 1 for Asrigdara  158
75 Table 24.4: Medicines at level 2 for Asrigdara  159
76 Table 24.5: Medicines at level 3 for Asrigdara  160
77 Table 25.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kashtaartava  163
78 Table 25.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kashtaartava  164
79 Table 25.3: Basti Dravyas at level 2 for Kashtaartava  166
80 Table 25.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with heavy bleeding  167
81 Table 25.5: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with scanty bleeding  167
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  xxixLIST OF TABLES
82 Table 26.1: Medicines at level 1 for Shweta Pradara  170
83 Table 26.2: Medicines used for Yoni Prakshalana in Shweta Pradara  171
84 Table 26.3: Medicines used for Yoni Vartia in Shweta Pradara  171
85 Table 26.4: Medicines used for Yoni Pichu in Shweta Pradara  172
86 Table 26.5: Medicines used for Yoni Dhupan in Shweta Pradara  172
87 Table 26.6: Medicines at level 2 for Shweta Pradara  172
88 Table 27.1: Medicines at level 1 for Avabahuka  177
89 Table 27.2: Medicines at level 2 for Avabahuka  179
90 Table 27.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Avabahuka  180
91 Table 28.1: Medicines at level 1 for Katigraha  183
92 Table 28.2: Medicines at level 2 for Katigraha  185
93 Table 28.3: Medicines at level 3 for Katigraha  186
94 Table 28.4: Panchakarma  procedures at level 4 for Katigraha  187
95 Table 29.1: Medicines at level 1 for Gridhrasi  190
96 Table 29.2: Medicines at level 2 for Gridhrasi  192
97 Table 29.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Gridhrasi  193
98 Table 30.1: Differential diagnosis of Pakshaghat  with various  198
 presentations of the diseases  
99 Table 30.2: Medicines at level 1 for Pakshaghat  201
100 Table 30.3: Medicines at level 2 for Pakshaghat  205
101 Table 30.4: Panchakarma procedures at level 3 for Pakshaghat  210
102 Table 31.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sandhivata  215
103 Table 31.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sandhivata  217
104 Table 32.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vatarakta  220
105 Table 32.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vatarakta  222
106 Table 32.3: Rasayanas can be used at level 3 for Vatarakta  223
107 Table 33.1: Differentiating features of common types of conjunctivitis  228
108 Table 33.2: Medicines at level 1 for Abhishyanda  228
109 Table 33.3: Medicines at level 2 for Abhishyanda  231
110 Table 33.4: Shodhana Chikitsa  and other Kriyakalpas  at level 3  232
 for Abhishyanda  
xxx AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESLIST OF TABLES
111 Table 34.1: Medicines at level 2 for Adhimantha  239
112 Table 34.2: Uses of Nasyas in various type of Adhimantha  242
113 Table 34.3: Uses of Tarpana in various type of Adhimantha  242
114 Table 34.4: Uses of Ashchyotana & Parisheka in various type of Adhimantha  243
115 Table 34.5: Uses of Anjana in various type of Adhimantha  243
116 Table 34.6: Uses of Siramokshana  in various type of Adhimantha  243
117 Table 34.7: Uses of Dhumapana  in various type of Adhimantha  243
118 Table 35.1: Medicines at level 1 for Dantaveshtaka  251
119 Table 35.2: Medicines at level 2 for Dantaveshtaka  252
120 Table 35.3: Kriya Kalpa  / Panchakarma  at level 3 for Dantaveshtaka  253
121 Table 36.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mukhapaka  256
122 Table 36.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mukhapaka  257
123 Table 36.3: Medicines at level 3 for Mukhapaka  258
124 Table 37.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pratishyaya  263
125 Table 37.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pratishyaya  264
126 Table 38.1: Clinical features of different types of Shiroroga  270
127 Table 38.2: Medicines at level 1 for Shiroroga  271
128 Table 38.3: Medicines at level 2 for Shiroroga  272
129 Table 38.4: Medicines at level 3 for Shiroroga  273
INDEX
1 Foreword  x
2 Message from Minister  xii
3 Preface  xiv
4 Acknowledgement  xvi
5 Abbreviation  xviii
6 Glossary  xxii
7 List of Tables  xxvi
NO.  CHAPTERS  PAGES
INTROD UCTION  1
PRANAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
1 Kasa  5
2 Tamaka Swasa  14
ANNAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
3 Amlapitta  27
UDAKAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
4 Jalodara  33
RASAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
5 Amavata  41
6 Jwara  47
7 Pandu  58
RAKTAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
8 Ekakushtha  65
9 Kamala  69
MEDOVAHA SROTAS ROGA
10 Hypothyroidism  75
11 Madhumeha  79
12 Sthoulya  86
PURISHAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
13 Arsha  93
14 Atisara  99
xxxii  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESINDEX
15 Bhagandara  104
16 Krimi  109
17 Parikartika  113
MANOVAHA SROTAS ROGA
18 Anidra  121
19 Apasmara  125
20 Vishada  129
MOOTRAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
21 Ashmari  137
22 Mutraghata  142
23 Mutrasthila  148
ARTAVAVAHA SROTAS ROGA
24 Asrigdara  157
25 Kashtaarthava  162
26 Shwetapradara  169
VATA VYADHI
27 Avabahuka  177
28 Katigraha  182
29 Gridhrasi  189
30 Pakshaghata  196
31 Sandhigata Vata  215
32 Vatarakta  220
NETRAGATA ROGA
33 Abhishyanda  227
34 Adhimantha  237
URDHWA JATRUGATA ROGA
35 Dantavestaka  251
36 Mukhapaka  255
37 Pratishyaya  261
38 Shiroroga  270
APPENDIX -
 Atura Pariksha Patrak  277
INTRODUCTION
The classical texts of Ayurveda i.e. ‘Samhita’  were structured thousands of year ago. The Samhita 
have a set pattern in which first part is narrative of entire text followed by principles, Ayurvedic 
biology, Diagnosis, treatment, therapies etc. This is probably the most relevant pattern to learn 
Ayurveda in depth. However, in recent times, practitioners need ready reckoners. This trend 
might have started since last 3-4 centuries. The texts like Bhaishajya Ratnavali  have described 
disease wise formulation. In the present era, medicines are mostly prepared by Ayurveda 
Pharma-companies. The diagnosis is largely laboratory based. Often allopathic method of 
diagnosis is used in clinical practice followed by Ayurvedic formulations as treatment. 
The Insurance coverage is getting more and more importance because of rising trend of lab 
investigations, which has also become a part of evidence to support the claim submitted by 
the beneficiary. As a matter of fact, typical Ayurvedic terminology is also being replaced by 
contemporary words. Though it might have facilitated non Ayurveda people to understand 
the prescription, it has also led to loss of specific knowledge behind the terminology. 
In the above mentioned circumstances, disease conditions most frequently observed in general 
practice have been chosen for preparing this document.The diseases have been categorized on 
the basis of Ayurvedic method of classification i.e. according the main Srotas  involved. It was 
decided to stick to Ayurvedic nomenclature and put nearest allopathy term in bracket for easy 
understanding of end user. Often, both the terms cannot be equated. Therefore, to clarify the 
meaning, case definition is given in each chapter. This is followed by presentation of disease, 
cardinal symptoms etc. to give weightage to clinical diagnosis. At the same time essential lab 
investigations have been mentioned wherever felt necessary. Types subtypes based on Dosha 
have been described. Efforts are made to describe the treatment according to Doshik  type of 
disease. It is not merely a compilation of references from classical text, but lot of brain storming 
have undergone while preparing the document. The treatment described is evidence based as 
well as experience based. Various formulations mentioned are indicative and not exclusive. 
Number of drugs has been listed for each of the disease condition. The treating physician shall 
have liberty to use any one or more medicines and formulations of his/her choice. 
It is expected that an Ayurveda Vaidya working at Primary Health Center may have limited 
resources. Therefore referral criteria have been mentioned. It must be kept in mind, especially 
by fresher that successful doctors are those who know when to refer the patient. 
Diet has major role to play in management of diseases. Therefore, emphasis has been given 
on specific medicinal properties of dietary substances mentioned in classical texts or have 
been scientifically established, while elaborating specific diet. Dietary substances known to 
aggravate disease condition have been specifically contraindicated. Entire part related to diet 
is purely based on Ayurvedic concept and non Ayurvedic reader might feel it contradictory at 
times to conventional understanding of diet. 
Every aspect of this document have been thoroughly discussed by experts of that particular 
subject, e.g. Diet was discussed by experts of Swasthavritta,  single plants were discussed by 
experts of Dravyaguna and so on. 
At the end of the document, classical Ayurvedic case record form based on Dashavidha Pariksha 
pattern of Ayurveda integrated with some relevant conventional method of case recording has 
been given for convenience for those working in hospital set-up. 
Efforts have been made to develop the document as per the international standards and could 
be useful not only in India but also to international community. It is expected that this effort 
would introduce uniform pattern of clinical record keeping that would facilitate data exchange 
and collate the data from different centers for academic purpose. 
2 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES
Pranavaha Srotas Roga

Brief Introduction of the disease: Kasa  has 
been described as an independent disorder 
as well as a symptom of many diseases 
like Tamaka Swasa  (Bronchial Asthma), 
Rajayakshma  etc. Kasa  (Cough) is the disease 
or symptom of respiratory tract occurring 
due to obstruction of Vata  Dosha  and its 
reverse movement. When occurring as an 
independent disease, it has mainly 5 different 
presentations as described in classical texts. 
The characteristic sound and pain of cough 
produced will be different according to causes 
of Dosha  vitiation & nature of obstruction to 
the forceful movement of the Vata Dosha . Case definition:- Prana Vayu  obstructed in 
the respiratory tract due to various reasons, 
attains upward direction and comes out 
with force making specific sound is called as  
Kasa . 
Various Presentation of Kasa
• Common clinical features: Kasa 
Pravriti  - Shushka  or Sakapha .  
(coughing – either dry or produc -
tive)
Kasa  depending upon its presentation is of 
five types-KASA (COUGH)
Table 1.1: Types of Kasa with their characteristics
Features Vataja Pittaja Kaphaja Kshathaja Kshayaja
Nature of 
coughDry cough with 
resonant or 
hollow sound Continuous 
cough Oral cavity 
coated with 
thick saliva/
phlegmDry cough in 
initial stage.___
Character 
of Sputum Scanty, dry 
and difficult 
expectoration Yellow  Excess, slimy 
and thick 
expectorationDry 
expectoration 
stained with 
blood.
 Foul 
smelling, 
greenish 
haemoptysis 
with pus.
Pain Pain in Hrut-
parshva-urah-shiraBurning 
sensation in 
chest.
 Painless 
coughing.Excessive 
pain in throat, 
pricking pain 
in chest___
Voice Hoarseness of 
voiceChange in voice
   ___
 Change in 
voice with 
rhonchi ___
Associated 
featuresDryness of chest, 
throat, mouth Bitterness of 
mouth, Burning 
sensation in 
throat, chest etcsweetness 
and stickiness 
in mouth, 
Sinusitis,  ___pain in 
flanks, 
Sinusitis, 
feeling
KASA (COUGH)
6 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESDifferential Diagnosis: 
• Tamaka Swasa
• Rajayakshma
• Kshataksheena
• Kapha Pittaja Jwara
• Vata Kaphaja Jwara
• COPD
• Bronchitis
• Bronchiectasis.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: Kasa  Pravriti  (coughing), 
Aruchi  (anorexia), Jwaranubhuti  (feverish), 
Kaphasthivana  (expectoration) and other 
specific Doshaja  symptoms as mentioned 
above.Examination:
• Throat congestion - In almost all 
types and more specifically in 
Pittaja  and Vataja  Kasa .
• Muco-purulent (greenish) sputum 
with foul smell – Kshayaja Kasa . 
• Raised body temperature, raised 
pulse or feverish feeling - Pittaja , 
Kshataja , Kshayaja  Kasa .
• Emaciated and debilitated general 
condition along with fever, muco-
purulent sputum, - Kshayaja  Kasa .
• On auscultation of chest, 
o Congestion, crepitation due 
to mucus/fluid trapped air – 
Kaphaja Kasa
o Wheezing in Vataja  or Pittaja 
Kasa .Feeling of 
fullness 
of chest & 
heaviness of 
bodyhollowness 
in chest,
Systemic 
featuresAnorexia, 
Giddiness, 
Weakness, 
UnconsciousnessFever, Thirst, 
Anorexia, Pandu  
Giddiness, 
UnconsciousnessDiminished 
appetite, 
AnorexiaFever, 
Arthralgia, 
Dyspnoea, 
ThirstFever, 
sudden 
desire for 
hot & cold, 
glossy & 
clear skin, 
consumes 
excessive 
food; but 
weak and 
emaciated, 
unformed/ 
hard stool.
KASA (COUGH)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 7Investigation: No specific investigation is 
required to be performed in this level.
Line of treatment:
In Vataja Kasa -
• Snehapana  - Ghrita  with diet of Peya, 
Mudagyusha  or milk
• Snigdha  Swedana - Apply Sneha  on 
chest area ( Abhyanga ), and then 
hot fomentation with warm hot 
water bag or hot Erand  Patra1 (for 20 
minutes).• Parisheka  – Snigdha  Parisheka , pref -
erably Ushna Jala  Siddha  with Erand 
Patra2, Tila Taila.3 
• Dhoomapana - Snaihika
In Kaphaja Kasa -
• Dhoomapaana - with Vairechanika 
Dhooma  using Maricha4, Pippali5, 
Ela6, Surasamanjari7 in conditions of 
Shirahshoola , Nasasrava , Urogaurav . 
(heaviness in chest due to 
congestion)
Table 1.2: Common medicines at level 1 for Kasa
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana
Vasa Svarasa8Swarasa 20 ml two to three times Honey
Bibhitaki Kwatha9Decoction 20 - 40 ml Twice a day Luke warm 
water
Bibhitaki Choorna10 + 
PippaliChoorna11Powder 2 gm + 1 gm Twice a day Luke warm 
water
Yastimadhu Churna12 + 
Sitopaladi Churna13Powder 1 gm + 2 gm Twice a day Honey
Table 1.3: Medicines at level 1 for Vataja Kasa
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of administration Anupana
Kantakaari Ghrita14Ghee 10 ml Empty stomach in early 
morning and eveningWarm water
Pippalyadi Ghrita15Ghee 10 ml Empty stomach in early 
morning and eveningWarm water
Rasna Ghrita16Ghee 10 ml Empty stomach in early 
morning and eveningWarm water
Talishadi Choorna17Powder 3 gm Twice a day Ghee and honey
Dashmoola Kwatha18Decoction 10 ml Twice a day Sharkara  and Ghrita
Agastya Haritaki19Avaleha 6-12 gm Warm water/milkVataja  Kasa - The treatment should be started 
with Snehana  with ghee, Peya/Yusha/Kshira  prepared with Vataghna  drugs, Abhyanga, 
Parisheka, Snigdha Sveda .
8 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASA (COUGH)
Table 1.4: Medicines at level 1 for Pittaja Kasa
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana
Vasa Churna20Powder 3 gm Twice a day Madhu  or 
Sharkara
Trinapanchmula + Pippali21 
+ Drakshakashaya22 Siddha 
KshiraMedicated milk Twice a day Madhu  or 
Sharkara
Gojihvadi Kwatha23Decoction 10 ml Twice a day Water
Drakshadi Leha24Avaleha 6-12 gm Twice a day Warm water/
milk
Kantakaryadi Kwatha25Decoction 12 – 24 ml Twice a day Water
Table 1.5: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphaja Kasa
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana
Trikatu  + Vasa Powder Lehana 3gm+ 2 gm Twice a day Madhu  
Sitopaladi26 + Bharang i27Powder Lehana 3gm + 1 gm Twice a day Madhu  
Pippali28 roasted with Tila 
Taila29Powder Twice a day Sharkara
Devadaaru30 + Haritaki31 
+ Musta32 + Pippali33 + 
Shunthi  Churna34Powder Lehana 1 gm each Twice a day Madhu
Referral criteria: 
• If patient not responding to above 
therapy.
• In the cases where complications 
arise.
• If further investigations are  
needed. 
• In case of Kshataja  (blood stained 
sputum) and Kshayaja KaasaLEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
If patient is not responding to level-1 
treatment, following investigations should 
be carried out.
• Hemogram with ESR 
• Sputum 
• X-Ray Chest PA View
Treatment: Treatment given in level -1 may 
be continued. Following medicines may be 
added.
KASA (COUGH)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 9Table 1.6: Common medicines at level 2 for all type of Kasa
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana
Chandramrut  
Rasa35Vati 1 Tab Twice a day Ajadugdha  in Vata , 
Gojihvadi  Kwatha36 in Kapha , 
Draksharishta37 in Pitta  
Bhagottara  Gutika38Two tabs 2 Tab Thrice a day Luke warm water
Lavangadi  Vati39Vati as 
lozenges6 pills/day Six time a day -
Khadiradi  Vati40Vati as 
lozenges6 pills/day Six time a day -
Samasharkara  
Churna41Powder 2-4 gm Twice a day Honey
Table 1.7: Medicines at level 2 for different type of  Kasa
Drug Dosage Dose Time of 
AdministrationDuration Anupana
Vataja Kasa
Chandrmrut  Rasa42Powder 125 mg - 
250 mgThrice daily 1-2 weeks Sitopaladi  Churna  
& honey
Kantakari Avaleha43Granules 10gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks
Sameerapannaga  Rasa Powder 60 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Sitopaladi  Churna  
& honey
Pittaja  Kasa
Shati  Churna Powder 2-3 gm 4-5 times a day 1 week With Honey
Draksharishta44Arishta-
Liquid10-20 ml Twice daily 2 weeks With equal 
quantity of 
water
Vasavaleha45 Granules 10 gm Twice daily 2-3 weeks
Bharangyadi  Avaleha46Granules 10 gm Twice daily 2-3 weeks
Kaphaj  Kasa
Shrungyadi  Churna Powder 2-3 gm 4-5 times a day 1 week With Honey
Vyaghriharitaki  
Avaleha47Granules 10 gm Twice daily 2-3 weeks
Agastya  Haritaki  
Avaleha48Granules 10 gm Twice daily 2-3 weeks
10 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASA (COUGH)
Kantakari  Avaleha49 Granules 10 gm Twice daily 2-3 weeks
Kaphaketu  Rasa50Powder 125-250 
mgTwice daily 1-2 weeks Talisadi  Churna  
with honey
Abhraka  Bhasma51Powder 125-250 
mgTwice daily 1-2 weeks Sitopaladi  with 
honey
Mrigashringa  Bhasma52Powder 125-250 
mgTwice daily 1-2 weeks Sitopaladi  with 
honey
Kshataja  Kasa
Eladi  Gutika53 Tab 2 tab Thrice daily 2-3 weeks –
Kushmand Avaleha54Avaleha 10g Twice daily 2-3 weeks Warm milk
Kshayaj  Kasa
Draksharishta55Arisht-
Liquid10-20 ml Twice daily 2-3 weeks with same 
quantity of 
water
Shwasakuthara  Rasa Tablet 125-250 
mg3-4 times a 
day2-3 weeks with honey
Malla  Sindura Powder 30 mg Twice daily 1 week With Vyaghri  
Haritaki  / honey
Shringarabhra  Rasa Powder 125-250 
mg Twice daily 2-3 weeks Sitopaladi  with 
honey
Shwaskaschintamani  
Rasa56Powder 125-250 
mgTwice daily 2-3 weeks Sitopaladi  with 
honey
Referral criteria: 
• If patients not responding to above 
therapy.
• Koch’s lesion or pleural effusion 
found in chest x-ray.
• In the cases where complications 
arise.
• If further investigations are  
needed.LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
If patient is not responding to level-2 treat -
ment, following radiological investigations 
should be carried out.
• CT scan- for further confirmation of 
diagnosis.
• Sputum Culture.
• 2D Echo 
KASA (COUGH)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 11Treatment: Treatment given in level -2 may 
be continued. 
Panchakarma : Panchakarma  may be carried 
out in following conditions of Kasa .
• Vamana : In Kaphaja  or 
Bahukaphapittaja  Kasa , only in 
patients with good strength.
• Virechana : In Paitika  Kasa  with Tanu  
Kapha  - Madhura  Dravya  Samyukta  
Trivrit  Virechana  In Paitika Kasa  with Ghana Kapha  – Tikta 
Dravya  Samyukta Trivrit Virechana .
• Shirovirechana : Kaphaja Kasa - 
Apamarga57, Tulsi58, Shigru Patra 
Swarasa59, Katphala60 
• Niruha  Basti : In Vataj Kasa  
associated with Purisha  and 
Adhovayu Vibandha
• Anuvasana  Basti : Snehanartha  in 
Vataja  Kasa.
REFERENCES
1 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol 3 (23)
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol 3 (23)
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 4 (59)
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol 3 (53)
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol 4 (42)
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol.1 (64)
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (72)
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (76) 
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1 (17)
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (17) 
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 4 (42)
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1 (79) 
13 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
8/103-104, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
12 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASA (COUGH)
14 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
18/35, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
15 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
18/36-38, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
16 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
18/43-46, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
17 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
8/145-148, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (4:10)
19 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
18/57-62, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. 
20 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (76) 
21 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 4 (42)
22 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 3 (21)
23 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (4:7)
24 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Kasachikitsa 15/6, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 25 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Kasachikitsa 15/28, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 
26 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:34) 
27 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 3 (13)
28 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 4 (42)
29 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 4 (59)
30 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 4 (12)
31 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1  
(31)
32 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (59)
33 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 4 (42)
34 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol.1 (65)
35 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (20:16)
36 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (4:7) 
KASA (COUGH)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1337 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (1:20) 
38 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Kasachikitsa 15/127-129, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 
2009 
39 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12:26) 
40 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12:26) 
41 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Kasachikitsa 15/33-34, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi,
42 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (20:16) 
43 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (3:4) 
44 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (1:20) 
45 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (3:2)) 
46 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Kasachikitsa 15/5, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 
47 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (3:6) 
48 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (3:1) 
49 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (3:4) 50 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (20:8) 
51 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (18:1) 
52 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (18:19) 
53 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12:3) 
54 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (3:7) 
55 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (1:20) 
56 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (16:58) 
57 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (7)
58 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (72)
59 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 4 
(51,52,53)
60 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (42) .
INTRODUCTION
Tamaka Swasa  is one among the five types of 
Swasa  (dyspnoea) mentioned in Ayurveda. 
It can be compared to bronchial asthma in 
modern medical science. Tamaka Swasa  as a 
diagnostic terminology encompasses various 
stages of asthma including atopic (allergic) 
asthma to chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disorders. The Tamaka Swasa  of recent onset 
is curable; however it becomes incurable after 
attaining the chronicity.1 So early diagnosis 
and therapeutic intervention is important.
Case definition:
Episodic manifestation of breathlessness 
triggered due to dust, cloudy atmosphere, 
exposure to direct wind, cold water,2 often 
associated with cough, wheezing is called as 
Tamaka Swasa .
Variants
a. Type 1 – Kaphadhika  
b. Type 2 – Vatadhika
Differential Diagnosis:
a. Kshudra Swasa3 
b. Chhinna4 / Mahan5 / Urdhwa Swasa6 
c. Hridroga
d. Rajayakshma
e. Pandu Roga
f. Vataja Grahanig. Kasa
h. Urahkshata
Line of management
Type 1 – Kaphadhika  – Shodhana / Kapha 
Nissaraka / Dhuma  followed with Shamana  
treatment, Kutipraveshika Rasayana .7
Type 2 – Vatadhika  – Tarpana / Shamana  and 
Bhrimhana, Vatatapika Rasayana .8
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/ PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation. Subtypes to 
be analyzed considering the tolerance of  
patient, periodicity and chronicity of the 
complaints.
Patient Examination:  Detailed examination 
of Pranavaha Srotasa  to identify the severity 
of breathing difficulty.
Investigations:  Hemogram, ESR
Treatment:
Type 1 Kaphadhika  variant: Treatment of 
Vegavastha  (At the time of acute exacerbations): 
Local Abhyanga  with Lavana Taila (Taila  
added with powdered salt and heated ) or 
any Vatahara Taila  like Brihatsaindhavadi  Taila  
applied over the chest and back followed 
with Swedana (local steam fomentation).9TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 15
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shunthi Siddha Jala Paniya Q.S. Frequently 15 days to 30 
daysNil
Dashamool-arishta Arishta 15-30 ml 4-5 times a day 15 days to 
one month-
Chandrashura Beeja 
KwathaKwatha 15-30 ml 4-5 times a day 15 days to 
one monthNil
Swasakuthara Rasa10Powder 125 mg Before food/ Twice 
or thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Talishadi Churna11Powder 2-3 gm As linctus frequently 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Sitopaladi Churna12Powder 2-3 gm For chewing/ 
frequently15 days to 
one monthHoney
Shatyadi Churna13Powder 2-3 gm Before meals/Twice 
or thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Dasamoola Kwatha14Decoction 60 ml empty stomach/
Twice daily15 days to 
one month1 tsp
Honey
Bharangyadi Kwatha15Decoction 60 ml empty stomach/
Twice daily15 days to 
one month1 tsp
Honey
Gojihvadi Kwatha16Decoction 60 ml empty stomach/
Twice daily15 days to 
one month1 tsp
Honey
Vasavaleha17Avaleha/  
linctus3-5 gm As linctus/ 
frequently15 days to 
one month-
Dashamoola 
Rasayana18Avaleha/  
linctus3-5 gm As linctus/ 
frequently15 days to 
one month-
Agasthya
Rasayana19Avaleha/  
linctus3-5 gm As linctus/ 
frequently15 days to 
one month-Table 2.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa
16 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESTAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
Type 2 Vatadhika  variant: In addition to the line of treatment mentioned at Level 1-
Table 2.2: Medicines at level 1 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swasa
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Vidaryadi
Kashaya20Decoction 60 ml empty stomach/twice 
daily 15 days to 
one month1 tsp
Honey
Vayu
Gutika21Vati 125 mg Before meals/Twice or 
thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Dhanwantara
Gutika22Vati 125 mg Before meals/Twice or 
thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Nayopayam
Kwatha23Decoction 60 ml empty stomach/twice 
daily 15 days to 
one monthHoney
Kantakari
Ghrita24Ghee 3-5 gm After food/Twice or 
thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthWarm water
Vidaryadi
Ghrita25Ghee 3-5 gm After food/Twice or 
thrice daily 15 days to 
one monthWarm water
Somasava Asava 15-30 ml 4-5 times a day 15 days to 
one monthEqual amount 
of water
Mahanarayana 
TailaTaila 5 ml 4-5 times a day 15 days to 
one monthBalajirakadi 
Kwatha 
(Kulatha ), goat milk, green leafy 
vegetables  like Patola , Shigru , brin -
jal, garlic, cardamom, cinnamon, 
pepper, ginger, honey, crab soup, 
Krita  and Akrita Mamsa Rasa . Luke 
warm water for drinking26
• Regimen ( Vihara ): Fomentation, 
hot water bath, moderate sun bath, 
warm clothes etc. and staying in 
fresh and ventilated places. Doing 
light exercises and maintaining 
daily routine.Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style):
All such food items alleviating Kapha  and 
Vata, Ushna  in property should be taken. 
And all such food items increasing Vata  are 
contraindicated. Care should be taken to 
improve the strength of the patient without 
aggravating Kapha . 
Do’s ( Pathya )–
• Food ( Ahara ): All dietary articles 
should be easily digestible and 
served warm. Unpolished rice, 
wheat, green gram, horse gram 
TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 17Don’ts ( Apathya )–
• Food ( Ahara ): All cold and heavy 
food should be avoided. Oily 
and fried items, bakery items, 
fast foods, chocolates, wafers etc. 
should be strictly avoided. All 
dairy products27 especially curd, 
paneer and ice creams should be 
strictly avoided. Intake of sesame, 
black gram , jaggery should be  
limited.28
• Vihara : Exposure to cold, dust, 
smokes and direct wind should be 
strictly avoided.29 Hard exercises 
and peak sun exposure are not 
advisable. Avoid air coolers and 
air conditioners. Avoid cold water 
bath and application of oil on head 
especially on symptoms of cold. 
Do not suppress natural urges 
especially coughing, sneezing and 
bowel and bladder responses. 
Avoid day sleeping.30
Referral criteria: Refer to level 2
1. Cases not responding to above line of 
management.
2. All cases of severe persistent Asthma.
3. Patient with co-morbidity of fever, 
patient may be suffering from cyano -
sis, patient may have signs of hyper -
capnia and in acute phase of febrile  
illness.LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis:- Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigation : same as level 1, in addition
• Sputum for AFB and Mantoux Test 
(Both to rule out Pulmonary TB in 
suspected cases)
• X- Ray of chest – PA view to rule out 
structural abnormalities to bilateral 
lungs, allied parts and heart.
• Pulmonary function tests- To assess 
the lung capacities.
• ECG
Treatment:
Type 1 Kaphadhika  Variant: Treatment 
of Vegavastha  (At the time of acute 
exacerbations): The patients with Vegavastha  
and Utklishta Dosha  should be given Abhyanga  
with Lavana Taila  and Swedana  followed by 
Ullekhna  (Vamana ) with warm saline water. 
Repeated Ushma Sweda with steam made from 
water and Tulasi  leaves may be given. After 
Kapha Shodhana patient may be subjected 
to moderate laxatives ( Mridu Virechana ) 
using Trivrita Lehya  15-20 gm without any 
Purvakarma .31
In addition to the Shamana management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. 
18 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESTAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
Table 2.3: Medicines at level 2 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Dashamoola Katutrayadi
Kashaya32Decoction 60 ml Empty stomach/
Twice daily15 days to 
one month1 tsp
honey
Swasakuthara Rasa33Churna / 
Vati125-250 
mg / 1-2 
Vati After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks  Honey/ 
Luke 
warm 
water
Svasakasa Chimtamani 
Rasa 34Churna / 
Vati125-250 
mgs/ 1-2 
Vati After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks  Honey/ 
luke warm 
water
Kanakasava35Asava 10-20 ml After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 weeks Equal 
quantity 
of water
Pipplayasava36Asava 10-20 ml After meal / twice 
daily2-3 weeks Equal 
quantity 
of water
Vyaghriharitaki 
Avaleha37Avaleha 5-10 gm Before meal twice 
daily2-3 weeks -
Shirisharishta38Arishta 10-20 ml After meal/ twice 2-3 weeks Equal 
quantity 
of water
Suvarnamalini Vasanta39Churna / 
Vati125-250 
mg / 1-2 
Vati After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks  Honey/ 
Luke 
warm 
water
Swasakuthara mishrana  
– Swasakuthara Rasa40  
1 part, Sutasekhara  
Rasa41 1 part and 
Karpooradi Churna42  
4 partPowder 1-2 gm 3-4 times a day 
during attack During 
attackHoney
Laxmivilasa Rasa43Powder 250 mg After food thrice 
a day2-3 weeks Honey
Mrityunjaya Rasa44 Powder 250 mg After food thrice 
a day2-3 weeks Honey, 
Ardraka 
Swarasa, 
Narilkela 
Sitayukta
TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 19Type 2 Vatadhika  variant: Snigdha Mridu 
Virechana with Eranda Taila 15-20 ml and 
milk (50-75 ml) may be given. Dhanwantarm 
Gutika45 in frequent doses with Jeeraka  water 
may be given in increased distress.
Pathya -Apathya  (diet and life style): Same 
as Level 1
Referral Criteria: Refer to Level 3
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
2. Moderate to Severe cases of Tamaka 
Swasa  with complications.
3. Severe cases associated with tuberculosis, 
cardiac diseases etc.
4. Chronic cases of Tamaka Swasa  which 
require classical Shodhana  therapy
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL / 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS 
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigation:-
• TMT to rule out Cardiac pathology 
and to ensure fitness for Shodhana  
therapy.
• 2D Echocardiography 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level 2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures can be performed.
Type 1 Kaphadhika variant: Purvakarma  
as Pachana, Deepana (Rookshana  if required), 
Snehapana  and Swedana  may be done before 
Shodhana
1. Pachana & Deepana  
2. Rookshana  if required - Butter milk 
with Hingvashtaka  Churna  to be given 
frequently for 2-3 days.
3. Snehapana & Swedana  
4. Vamana  followed with Dhoomapana 
5. Virechana  
6. Rasayana
Table 2.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kaphadhika Tamaka Swasa
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Vardhamana 
Pippali PrayogaKshirapaka Starting with 
3 Pippali  
increasing upto 
33 PippaliEarly morning 
empty stomach1 course 
(22 days)Nil
Agasthya 
Rasayana46Avaleha 15 gm Early morning 
empty stomachOne 
monthWarm 
water
Chyavana Prasha 
Avaleha47Avaleha 15 gm Early morning 
empty stomachOne 
monthWarm 
milk
20 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESTAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
Type 2 Vatadhika variant: Same line of 
management in Level 2 during Vegavastha . 
Patient can also be supported with application 
of 20-30 drops of Ksheerabala  (101) Avrita48 over the chest and mild massage. Debilitated 
patients may be planned for Sarvanga 
Abhyanga  with Dhanwantaram Taila49 and 
Shashtika Pinda Sweda as IPD .
Table 2.5: Medicines at level 3 for Vatadhika Tamaka Swas a
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Malla Naga Mishrana  (Malla  
Sindoora  1 part50, Naga Guti  
1 part51, Abhraka  Bhasma 1 
part52, Shringha  Bhasma  4 
part53Powder 250 to 
500 mg 3-4 times as 
frequent doseOne 
monthWith honey
Prabhakra Vati54 Vati 750 mg Twice daily One 
monthArjunarishta
1 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/62, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 516
2 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/62, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 516
3 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/65-67, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 518
4 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/52-54, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 516
5 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/46-48, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 5156 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/49-51, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 515
7 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/89, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 521
8 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/90, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 521
9 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/71, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 518
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:49), 2000, 
p. 373REFERENCES
TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2111 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:13), 2000, 
p. 321
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:34), 2000, 
p. 348
13 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/123-124, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 526
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:10), 2000, 
p.176
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:25), 2000, 
p. 192
16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:7), 2000, 
p. 41
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:26), 2000, 
p. 153
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:14), 2000, 
p. 135
19 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:1), 2000, 
p. 111
20 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:31), 2000, 
p. 19921 Vajrajivana, Sahastrayogam Gutika 
Prakarna, 3rd edition, Delhi: Chaukhamba 
Sanskrit Prathisthan; 2001, p. 255
22 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:14), 2000, 
p. 518
23 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:14), 2000, 
p. 180
24 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
18/125-128, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 547
25 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:41), 2000, 
p. 297
26 Sri Govindacharya, Bhaishajya Ratnavali , 
Hikka-Swasa Chikitsa Adhyaya 16/137-
139, p. 509
27 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/14-16, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 510
28 Rajkumar, Food allergy in bronchial asthma: 
Diagonostic modalities; Indian Journal of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology;  July-
Dec 2013, Vol. 27, Issue 2
29 Raj Kumar, Nirupam Sharan, Manoj 
Kumar, Indu Bisht, S. N. Gaur , Pattern of 
skin sensitivity to various aeroallergens in 
patients of bronchial asthma and/or allergic 
rhinitis in India; Indian Journal of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology Jul-Dec 2012, 
Volume 26, Issue 2
30 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Uttara Tantra 
50/3-5, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
22 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESTAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 365
31 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
17/89, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 521
32 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:9), 2000, 
p.107
33 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:49), 2000, 
p. 730
34 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (16:58), 2000, 
p. 241
35 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1:9), 2000, 
p. 53
36 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1:22), 2000, 
p. 75
37 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:6), 2000, 
p. 30
38 Sri Govindacharya, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Swasa Rogadhikra 72/72, Chaukhamba 
Prakshan Varanasi, 2008
39 Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala of Mahakavi 
Sri Krishnaram Bhatta edited with 
Vaishnawra hindi commentary by Sri R. 
Kaladhara Bhatta and notes by Sri Laxmiram 
Swami. Krishnadas Academy, Varanasi. 
Second edition. 1999. Jvaraadhikar 60-6240 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:49), 2000, 
p. 730
41 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:52), 2000, 
p. 735
42 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:6), 2000, 
p. 313
43 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:39), 2000.
44 Pandit Duttaram Chaubhay, Bruhat Rasa 
Raj Sundar p. 244, Varanasi: Chaukhambha 
Orientalia, 2000.
45 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:14), 2000, 
p. 518
46 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:1), 2000, 
p. 111
47 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:11), 2000, 
p. 127
48 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:11), 2000, 
p. 378
49 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:22), 2000, 
p. 394
TAMAKA SWASA (BRONCHIAL ASTHMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2350 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (15:3), 2000, 
p. 567
51 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18:7), 2000, 
p. 609
52 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18:1), 2000, 
p. 591
53 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18:19), 2000, 
p. 642
54 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
33/40-41, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009

Annavaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Amlapitta  is a disease of Annavaha Srotas  with 
main characteristics like Urodaha, Avipaka, 
Tikta Amla Udgara  etc. The chronic conditions 
may cause Kotha, Kandu, Mandala, etc . The 
condition may be co-related with Acid Peptic 
Disorders. 
Case Definition:
Patients presenting with Tikta Amla Udgara  
(Bitter and sour belching), Hrit Kantha Daha 
(Burning sensation in throat and chest), 
Aruchi (Tastelessness), Hrillasa (Nausea), 
Uthklesha (Nausea), Avipaka (Indigestion) etc. 
can be diagnosed as a case of Amlapitta .
Types:
Amlapitta is of three types according to 
Anubandha Dosha  as Vataja, Vatakaphaja and 
Kaphaja. According to clinical presentation 
Amlapitta  is of two types Urdhwaga  and 
Adhoga. Urdhwaga is characterised with upper  
GIT symptoms and  Adhoga is characterised 
with lower GIT symptoms.
Differential Diagnosis
• Chhardi• Pittaja Gulma
• Pittashmari
• Annadravashoola
• Parinamashoola
• Udara Poorvarupa
Line of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Vamana and 
Virechana
• Shamana Chikitsa  - Langhana, 
Pachana, Deepana
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO  
AYURVEDIC PHYSICIAN’S 
CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations: nothing specific
Treatment:  any of the following drugs:AMLAPITTA
28 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAMLAPITTA
Table 3.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amlapitta
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shunthi Churna Churna 2-3 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Amalaki Churna Churna 2-3 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Yashtimadhu Churna Churna 2-3 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Hingwashtaka Churna Churna 2-3 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Shivakshara Pachana 
ChurnaChurna 2-3 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Avipattikara Churna1Churna 4-6 gm Before meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Warm water 
/ Madhu
Kamadudha Rasa Vati 1-2 tab  
(125-250 mg)Before meal / 
thrice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Referral criteria: 
• Patients not getting relief 
• Chronic cases 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: S ame as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigations: 
• Stool for occult blood
• LFT
• USG abdomen / pelvis 
Treatment: Virechana and Rasaushadhis along 
with  Shamana Aushadhi mentioned in Level 1 
can be given:Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s: 
•  Ahara –  Yava, Godhuma, Seasoned  
Shali, Mudga Yusha, Laaja Saktu, 
Karavellaka, Patola, Kushmanda, 
Dadima, Amalaki, Kapittha, Godugdha, 
Mamsarasa, Sharkara, Madhu, 
Narikelodaka
•  Vihara  – Follow  dinacharya , Yogasana
Don’t s: 
•  Ahara: Heavy food , Vidahi, Viruddha 
Ahara, Kulatha, Udada, Navanna, 
Tila, fermented foods  like bread , 
excessive intake of curd, spicy food, 
bakery food, untimely food habit, 
deep fried food, alcohol intake and  
smoking.
•  Vihara  – Suppression of urges, 
worry, anger, stress, day sleep .
AMLAPITTA
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 29Table 3.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amlapitta
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Pravala 
panchamrita Rasa2Vati 1 to 2 tab
(125-250 mg)After meal / 
thrice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Sutashekhara 
Rasa3Vati 1 to 2 tab
(125-250 mg)Before meal / 
thrice a day1-2 weeks Warm water
Shankha Bhasma4Churna 125-500 mg / 
dayBefore meal 1-2 weeks Warm water 
/ Takra
Narikela Lavana Churna 1 gm Before meal 1-2 weeks Warm water 
/ Takra .
Pravala Bhasma5Churna 250 mg - 500 
mg / dayBefore meal 1-2 weeks Warm water
Kapardika Bhasma Churna 125-500 mg / 
dayBefore meal 1-2 weeks Warm water 
/ Takra
Patoladi Kwatha Kwatha 10-15 ml Empty stomach 1-2 weeks -
Kalyanaka Kshara Churna 2-3 gms Before meals 1-2 weeks Warm water
Virechana Karma  – Abhyantara Snehapana  
with Dadimadi Ghrita, Vidaryadi Ghrita, 
plain Gau Ghrita followed with Virechana by 
Trivritta Lehya, Panchasakara Churna, Eranda 
Bhrishta Haritaki etc.
Referral criteria:
• Patients not responding to treat -
ments mentioned in level 2
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 & level 2 
for a fresh case reporting directly. Investigations: In addition to those men -
tioned in Level 2.
• Endoscopy 
Treatment:
Shodhana: 
• Vamana - Madanaphala, Vacha , 
Patola , Nimba Kalka, Yashtimadhu 
Phanta, Saindhava Lavana Jala.
• Virechana 
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):  Same  as mentioned in  
level 1.
30 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAMLAPITTA
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7/2), 2000.
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (16/37),  
2000.
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/52),  
2000.
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18/18), 2000.
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18/8),  
2000 .REFERENCES
Udakavaha Srotas Roga

JALODARA  (ASCITES)
INTRODUCTION
Eight different types of Udara Roga are 
mentioned in Ayurvedic classics, such 
as Vatika, Paittika, Kaphaja, Sannipaatika , 
Pleehodara, Baddhodara, Kshatodara  and 
Jalodara . If untreated, all types of Udara  will 
culminate into Jalodara . Jalodara is considered 
as one among the ‘ Ashta Mahagada’ . The 
main pathogenesis involved in Udara  is 
Agnimandya , Doshopachaya & Srotorodha . 
Therefore, the treatment involves Deepana, 
Pachana & Nitya Virechana .
Case Definition:
Distention of abdomen due to accumulation 
of fluid in peritoneal cavity associated with 
loss of appetite, heaviness of abdomen, 
general debility and edema.
Differential Diagnosis:
• Gulma
• Yakrutodara
• Pleehodara
• Kamala
• Cirrhosis
• Hepatitis• Hepatocellular adenoma
• Hepato-renal syndrome
• Protein-Losing enteropathy
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation, patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of Jalodara . 
Distended abdomen, excessive thirst, anal 
wetness, presence of averted umbilicus, 
shifting dullness, fluid thrill, engorged 
vessels over abdomen etc. may confirm the 
diagnosis. 
Investigations:  Though much can be 
diagnosed based on the clinical signs and 
symptoms, laboratory investigations may 
help the clinician to confirm the diagnosis 
and rule out other conditions.
• Blood for Hb, TLC (leucocytosis), 
DLC (Neutrophilia)
• Urine Routine and microscopic
Treatment:  In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Jalodara, 
along with diet restriction, two or more of 
following drugs may be given:
34 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJALODARA (ASCITES)
Table 4.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jalodara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Bhumyamalaki Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks Honey / 
water
Katukarohini1Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks Honey / 
water
Kumari Swarasa 10-20 ml After meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Punarnavadi Churna2Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks Honey / 
water
Haritaki3Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Indrayana4Churna 3-6 gm / 
10-20 mlAfter meal /
thrice a day2-3 weeks Honey / 
water
Punarnavashtaka 
Kwatha5Kwatha 12-24 ml before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks-
Dashamoola Kwatha6Kwatha 12-24 ml before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks-
Phalatrikadi Kwatha7Kwatha 12-24 ml before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks-
Pathyadi Kwatha8Kwatha 12-24 ml before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks-
Gomutra Haritaki 
Churna9Churna 3–6 gm After meal /
twice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
e.g. Yavagu, Yusha, Tilanala Kshara 
or Palasha Kshara, Vartaka Kshara, 
Swarjika Kshara etc. semi liquids are 
advised. Yava  along with Vastuka  
(Bathua  leaves), Karela  (Karavellaka ) 
are advised. 
• Vihara : Timely meals, relaxation 
techniques
Don’ts -
• Ahara : Salt and water intake should 
be restricted, heavy food, green 
peas, black eyed beans, lentils, 
yellow gram, raw vegetables and In addition to these, patients may be advised 
to maintain input-output chart for fluid 
regulation, and record of abdominal girth. 
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Only milk diet is advised. 
Goat / camel / cow / buffalo 
milk, buttermilk, Peya – Jangala 
Mamsa Rasa , Khichadi  prepared 
with seasoned rice and Moong Daal , 
Shigru , fresh vegetables soup. Diet 
with Deepana  (digestive) property 
and Laghu  (light to digest) property 
JALODARA (ASCITES)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 35salads, refined foods such as white 
flour ( Maida - bread, pizza, biscuits), 
sprouts, etc. are contraindicated.
• Vihara : Physical and mental stress, 
excessive exercise, suppression of 
natural urges, day sleep, blood-
letting, 
Referral Criteria: Refer to level 2
1. Patients not responding to above 
mentioned management
2. Imbalance in fluid input-output ratio
3. Signs of jaundice, cardiac failure or renal 
failure 
4. Signs of hepatic encephalopathy 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: The diagnosis is made 
on the basis of criteria mentioned in level-1 
for fresh cases. The case referred from level-1 
or fresh case must be evaluated thoroughly 
for any complication.Investigations: Same as Level 1, In addition; 
the following tests can be done:
• Liver Function Tests:  Elevated 
amino transferase - ALT/AST 
> 45U/lit, disturbed albumin: 
globulin ratio; raised alkaline 
phosphates; higher values of 
prothrombin time
• Lipid profile - Increased values of 
S. Cholesterol, S. Triglyceride
• Renal function tests
• Sr. electrolytes (Na, K, Ca)
• ECG for cardiac function 
monitoring.
• USG
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Rasaushadhi  
(Herbo-mineral drugs) can be used at 
this level. Patient may be kept under 
observation while prescribing these kinds of  
medicines. 
Table 4.2: Medicines at level 2 for Jalodara
Drug Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Narayana Churna10Churna 3-5 gm Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 
weeksTakra
Kumaryasava11Asava 20-40 ml Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 
weeksEqual quantity of 
water
Abhaya Vati12Vati 1-2 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 
weeksLukewarm water
Shilajatu Churna13Churna 1-2 gm After meal / 
thrice a day3 months Cow urine
36 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJALODARA (ASCITES)
In addition to these, patients may be advised 
to maintain input-output chart for fluid 
regulation and record of abdominal girth. 
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): 
Same as level 1
Referral Criteria:
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
2. Patients with increased level of  
bilirubin 
3. Severe persistent vomiting or diarrhea
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR
DISTRICT HOSPITAL / 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigation:
• USG Abdomen
• Abdominal paracentesis and 
analysis of ascitic fluid
• CT Scan
Treatment: In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures indicated for Jalodara  can be 
performed.
Shodhana Chikitsa
1. Nitya Mridu Virechana
2. Virechana Karma
3. Abdominal tapping may be done as 
per requirement. 
4. Rasayana - Vardhamana Pippali  
  Shilajatu Rasayana
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1Chitraka Ghrita14Ghrita 3-5 gm before meal / 
twice a day2-3 
weeksLuke warm 
water
Jalodaradi Rasa15Vati 1-2 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 
weeksWater
Arogyavardhini 
Rasa16Churna / 
Vati250–500 mg 
(1-2 Vati)After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 
weeksWater
Icchabhedi Rasa17Vati 1 Vati Early morning 
empty stomach2 times a 
weekWater
JALODARA (ASCITES)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 371. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Jwara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 5/172 edited by 
Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. Varanasi: 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 1993.
2. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/36 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
3. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Chardi Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 19/9 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
4. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/22 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th  
ed. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 1993.
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (4:22)
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (4:16).
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-II (4:15).
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (7:8).
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (7:8).10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (7:19).
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I ( 1:12).
12. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/87-90 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
13. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/60 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
14. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/139 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part-II ( 16:19)
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I ( 20:4)
17. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/65-66, 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th  
ed. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 1993.REFERENCES

Rasavaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION:
Amavata  is a condition described in Ayurveda 
involving multiple joints, including sacroiliac 
joints with severe pain swelling and stiffness. 
General symptoms like fever, loss of appetite 
etc may also be associated. The disease 
conditions like Rheumatoid Arthritis, many 
other forms of connective tissue disorders 
like Polymyositis, Polyarthritis in elderly 
like Polymayalgia Rheumatica and common 
infective Arthritis in children like Rhueumatic 
Fever, Chikungunya Arthritis, Myofascial 
Pain Syndromes may be considered under 
the umbrella of Amavata . 
Case Definition:
Polyarthritis associated with stiffness and 
associated symptoms of Ama  like Angamarda  
(generalized body pain), Aruchi  (anorexia), 
Trushna  (increased thirst), Alasya  (lassitude), 
Gaurava  (heaviness of the body), Jwara  
(fever), Apaka  (delayed digestive capacity) 
and Shunata Anganam  (joint specific or 
generalized swelling), constipation and 
polyuria. Rarely the disease can manifest as 
monoarthritis also. 
Differential Diagnosis:
• Sandhigat Jwara 
• Ama Jwara Line of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Virechana, Basti, 
Raktamokshana
• Shamana Chikitsa  - Langhana, 
Swedana, Rukshana, Pachana, Deepana
• External applications -  Lepa, 
Upanaha 
• Rasayana Chikitsa  for Rasa  
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Ama and Vata
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/ PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation 
Investigations:
• ESR 
• Complete Blood Count 
Treatment:  In the initial stage, Rookshana, 
Pachana and Deepana should be attempted 
with some of the following drugs. AMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
42 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
Table 5.1: Medicines at level 1 for Amavata
Drug Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shunthi Churna 1-2 gm Before meal /
twice daily2-3 weeks 3-5 Eranda  Taila  
with warm water
Trikatu Churna 1-2 gm Before meal /
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Musta Churna 3-5 gm Before meal /
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Shadanga Paneeya Phanta QS Whole day – to 
quench the thirst3-5 days
Gomutra Haritaki1Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Ajmodadi Churna2Churna 2-3 gm Before meal /
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Amrutadi 
Kashaya3Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach /
6 am & 6 pm2-3 weeks Sugar – 3 gm
Dashamoola 
Kwatha4Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach /
6 am & 6 pm2-3 weeks -
Sanjivani Vati5Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Amapachana Vati Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Eranda Taila Oil 15-30 ml* Once at bed time 
or empty stomach 
early morning2-3 weeks Luke warm water / 
warm milk
*Dose can be individualized according to 
bowel response
The patient may also be instructed to do 
mild poultice fomentation with heated sand 
(Baluka Sweda ) on the affected joints self.
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Since formation of Ama  is the key factor in 
the pathogenesis of Amavata  all food articles 
and activities leading to reduction of Agni 
and formation of Ama should be avoided. 
The patients should be always specifically instructed to stick on to light and non-fatty 
diet in two Annakala, preferably at morning 
and evening. The amount of food should be 
less than moderate and eat while hungry. 
Consumption of large amount of water while 
eating also is not good. Patient should avoid 
stress in general.
Do’s ( Pathya )
• Ahara : Light diet, Panchakola 
Yavagu, Ushna Jala,  Vegetables like 
Methi, Shigru, Vastuka, Karvellaka, 
Ardraka  and pulses like horse gram 
(Kulattha ). Crab soup, Rasona .
AMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 43• Vihara : Hot water bath,  sun bath , 
timely eating, following daily & 
seasonal regimen properly
Don’ts ( Apathya )
• Ahara : Food articles which are  
heavy to digest like fried items, 
sweets, all dairy products except 
buttermilk, Dadhi, Matsya, Guda, 
Ksheera, Upodika, Masha, Pishta  
preparations made of green peas, 
raw vegetables and salads, pota -
toes, sour food like tomato, lemon, 
tamarind etc. 
• Vihara : Divaswapna (Day sleeping), 
Ratri Jagarana (night awakening), 
Ajirnashana  (eating without the 
feel of appetite), overeating, 
Vishamashana (eating at odd 
timings), physical exertion just after 
eating, exposure to cold, sedentary 
life style etc are to be avoided. Referral Criteria:
• Patients not responding to above 
management 
• Chronic patients with complications 
like joint deformities, muscle 
wasting, anaemia 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly
Investigations: Same as level 1, in addition
• CRP and RF
• Radiographic evaluation – X rays of 
the more affected joints to evaluate 
the level of evolving joint deformity.
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added 
Table 5.2: Medicines at level 2 for Amavata
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Rasnapanchaka 
KwathaKwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach /
6 am & 6 pm2-3 
weeksShunti  Churna  
2-3 gm
Rasanasaptaka 
Kwatha6Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach /
6 am & 6 pm2-3 
weeks-
Agnitundi Vati7Vati 1-2 tab After meal /
thrice daily2-3 
weeksWater
Simhanada Guggulu8Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
twice daily2-3 
weeksWater
Saubhagyasunthi 
PakaChurna 5-10 gm After meal /
twice daily2-3 
weeksWater
Amavatari Rasa9 
(Avoid milk and 
green gram)Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 
weeksWater
44 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
Inpatient Panchakarma  treatment:
Swedana with  Dhanyamla Dhara  for 7 days, 
Rooksha Pinda Sweda , Nadi Sweda, Agni Lepa  
(external application of drugs having Ushna 
Virya like Tulasi, Maricha , Agnimantha, 
Nirgundi etc). Lepa  with Dashanga Lepa or 
Lepa Gutika , Grihadhoomadi, Jatamayadi, 
Kottamchukkadi  etc.
Abhyanga (external oil application) in  
Nirama Avastha: Visha Garbha Taila, Pancha 
Guna Taila, Kottamchukadi Taila, Brihat 
Saindhavadi Taila, Karpooradi Taila.
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria:
• Patient not responding to above 
mentioned management 
• Patients showing signs of severe 
complications
• Patients of severe chronicity who 
require complete Panchakarma  ther -
apy and Rasayana Chikitsa  for better 
recovery 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigation:
• ANA (Anti-nuclear Antibody) 
profile to identify the specific auto 
immune disorder when ANA 
screening is found to be positive.
• Echocardiography to rule out 
cardiac involvement in ASO  
(Antistreptolysin O Titers) positive 
patients
• Liver Function Test to rule out 
disease related or drug related 
hepatic impairment (do at least 
ALT) especially to patients of RA 
or other connective tissue disorder 
who were under long term DMARD 
(Disease-Modifying Anti-rheumatic 
Drugs) or other medications.
• Renal Function Test (at least 
S. Creatinine) to rule out renal 
impairment.
• Chest X ray or CT chest to rule out 
Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD). 
• Synovial Fluid Analysis in 
unresponsive mono-arthritis to rule 
out infective arthritis like TB or 
gonococcus. 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level -2, Panchakarma  
procedures indicated for Amavata  can be  
performed.
AMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 45Table 5.3: Medicines at level 3 for Amavata
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Vishatinduka Vati Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Vatavidhwamsa Rasa10Churna 125-250 mg After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks honey/ 
water
Sameerpannaga Rasa Churna 60-125 mg After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks honey/ 
water
Malla Sindura Churna 60-125 mg After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks honey/ 
water
Amrita Bhallataka 
Avaleha11Granules 5-10 gm After meal /
twice daily2-3 weeks Water
Guggulu Tiktakam 
KashayaKwatha 12-24 ml Morning & 
evening empty 
stomach2-3 weeks
-
Panchakarma  Procedures:  
Shodhana Chikitsa
a. Virechana Karma - Abhyantara Snehana  
with Shatpala Ghrita, Indukanta Ghrita, 
Shunthi Ghrita or gaug hrita added with 
Kshara and Saindhava Lavana followed 
with  Virechana by Trivritta Avaleha   
30-100 gm, Abhayadi Modaka  2-5 tablets  
etc.b. Basti  – Vaitarana Basti, Kshara Basti, 
Ardha Matrika Niruha12
Rasayana : 
• Pippali Vardhamana Rasayana13
• Bhallataka Rasayana
• Guduchi Rasayana
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1. Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hrudaya 
Vidyotini commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Varanasi, Uttara sthana 
Mukharogapratishedha Adhyaya 22/102 p. 
no. 724.
2. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 6/115-119, p.no.187.
3. Nishteshwara, Parishishta Prakarana, 
Sahasrayogam, Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series, Varanasi, Third edition 2011,  
p.362.
46 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAMAVATA (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS) 
4. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/30-33, p.no.140.
5. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/18-21, p.no.197.
6. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/88-89, p.no.149.
7. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, Agnimandya 
Rogadhikara 10/93-94 p. 344.
8. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikar 29/173-184, p. 610.9. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikar 29/69-70, p.601.
10. Yogaratnakara, Vaidya Lakshmi Pati 
Shastri, Vidyotini Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Reprint 2013 
Vatavyadhi Chikitsa, 1-3, p.no. 546.
11. Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hrudaya Vidyotini 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Uttara Sthana Rasayana Vidhi 
Adhyaya 39/75-78, p. no.818.
12. Chakrapani, Chakradatta, Indradev 
Tripathi, Vaidya prabha Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Bhawan, Varanasi, 
Reprint 2014, Chakradatta Niruhadhikara 
73/23-26, p.no. 455.
13. Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hrudaya Vidyotini 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Uttara Sthana Rasayanavidhi 
Adhyaya 39/98-100, p. no.820.
INTRODUCTION
Jwara  is a disease of Rasavaha Srotasa  hav -
ing its origin from Amashaya , resulting due 
to Agnimandya and presented with Santapa  
(raised body temperature), Swedaavrodha 
anhidrosis and Angamarda body ache as 
its cardinal features.All most all the infec -
tious diseases (viral/bacterial) presenting 
with raised body temperature as predom -
inant feature have been categorized under  
Jwara .
On the basis of predominance of Dosha  and 
Dhatugata Avastha, Jwara  has been classified 
into various types and while deciding 
the line of treatment, all these types are 
to be considered. For deciding the line of 
treatment, differential diagnosis among 
the Doshic  varieties, Sama – Nirama Avastha, 
Nava- Jirna Avastha  or Dhatugata Avastha  or 
other presentations like Punaravartaka Jwara  
are considered.
Case Definition:
Patients presenting with raised body temper -
ature associated with anhidrosis, associated 
with body ache, anorexia, headache, fatigue, 
weakness and lethargy.
Differential Diagnosis:
Differential diagnosis is essential for diag -
nosing the type of Jwara  and its stage. For the 
purpose of deciding line of management, the 
following stages should be diagnosed. JWARA  (FEVER)
• Sama / Nirama Avastha of Jwara
• Taruna / Jirna Jwara
• Eka / Dwi / Tridoshaja Jwara
• Dhatugata Jwara
• Sharira / Manasa
• Agantuja / Nija Jwara
• Punaravartaka Jwara
Jwara due to specific conditions like Romantika , 
Masurika , Pratishyaya , Kasa , Mutrakrucchra , 
Rajyakshma  etc. should be diagnosed and 
treated accordingly. 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC
Clinical Diagnosis:  Patient should be 
diagnosed on the basis of history of illness, 
degree of fever, onset, associated symptoms, 
chronicity, complications etc. The body 
temperature above the normal range of 
36.5–37.5 °C (97.7–99.5 °F) or temperature 
in the rectum is at or over 37.5–38.3 °C 
(99.5–100.9 °F) or temperature in the mouth 
(oral) is at or over 37.7 °C (99.9 °F) or 
temperature under the arm (axillary) is at or 
over 37.2 °C (99.0 °F) shall also be taken into  
account.
Investigations: 
• CBC
• Peripheral blood smear
48 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJWARA (FEVER)
Table 6.1: Medicines at level 1 for Jwara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Nagaradi Kwatha1Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week -
Guduchyadi 
Kwatha2Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week -
Parpataka Kwatha3Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week -
Godanti Bhasma4Churna 125-250 mg Before meal / 
thrice a day1 week Warm water
Samshamani Vati5Vati 2 Vati 
(500 mg)Before meal / 
thrice a day1 week Warm water
Mahasudarshana 
Churna6Phanta 50 ml Before meal / 
thrice a day1 week Warm water
Jwaramurari Rasa Vati 125-250 mg Before meal / 
thrice a day1-2 weeks Water / Madhu
Table 6.2: Management of Jwara as per the Doshik predominance at level 1
Vataja Pittaja Kaphaja Vata - Pittaja Pitta - 
ShleshmajaVata - 
Shleshmaja
Guduchyadi 
KwathaPatoladi 
KwathaChaturbhadra 
AvalehaChandanadi 
KwathaKantakaryadi 
KwathaDashamula 
Kwatha
Drakshadi 
KwathaDuralabhadi 
KwathaNimbadi 
KwathaGuduchyadhi 
KwathaNagaradi KwathaPippalyadi 
Kwatha
Rasnadi 
KwathaVasadi 
KwathaAbhayadi 
KwathaBharangadi 
KwathaPatoladi KwathaPanchakola 
Kwatha
Vishwadi 
KwathaParpatakadi 
KwathaVasa Kantakari 
KwathaUshiradi 
KwathaPanchatiktaka 
KwathaDarvyadi 
Kwatha
*Ruksha Sweda in Vatashleshmaja JwaraLine of Treatment:
• In Sama or Nava Avastha of Jwara, 
patients shall be kept on fasting or 
light diet.
• After perspiration and some relief 
in body-ache, headache, light 
liquid diet or medicated water like Shadanga Paniya with few of the 
medicines mentioned below can 
be given considering the type of 
Jwara and its cause. In the Nirama or 
Jirna Jwara  following medicines can 
be given as per requirement along 
with diet restrictions .
JWARA (FEVER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 49Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Shadanga Paniya  (medicated 
water prepared by Musta, Parpataka, 
Ushira, Chandana, Nagara, Udichya), 
Tarpana  prepared of the Laja Saktu 
(Churna  of perched paddy) mixed 
with honey, sugar and juices of 
fruits, Mudga Yusha. Yavagu  (gruel), 
odana  (boiled rice) and Laja (popped 
or perched paddy), Peya prepared 
with Laja / Yava  added with Nagar, 
Pippalimula, Amalaki, Mrudvika, 
vegetables like Patola, Karavellaka , 
Karkotaka.
• Vihara : complete bed rest, staying in 
well ventilated room with hygienic 
conditions
Don’ts – 
• Ahara : Heavy food, curd, green 
peas, black eyed beans, lentils,  
yellow gram, black gram, raw vege -
tables and salads, refined foods such 
as white flour ( Maida ), contaminat -
Table 6.3: Clinical features as per Doshik  predominance
Vata Vepathu  
(shivering)Vishama Vega 
(irregular 
intensity)Kanth-oshtha
Shosha  
(dryness of 
throat & lip)Nindranasha
(insomnia)Shirahshoola  
(headache)
Pitta Tikshna 
Vega  (high 
intensity)Atisara
(diarrhoea)Nidraalpta  
(diminished 
sleep)Vami
(Vommiting)Mukhapaka  
(sore in mouth)
Kapha Gaurav 
(heaviness)Sheeta
(cold)Utklesha 
(nausea)Romaharsha  
(horripilation)Atinidra  
(exessive sleep)ed water or food, sprouts, cold food 
and beverages, junk foods, fried 
food, bakery items.
• Vihara : Physical and mental exer -
tion like physical exercises, expo -
sure to cold, breeze, suppression of 
natural urges, taking bath with cold 
water etc.
Referral Criteria: Patient not responding to 
above management, patient presenting with 
signs of high grade fever, delirium, severe 
vomiting, posing danger of dehydration or 
any such other complications like bleeding, 
anuria etc. shall be directly referred to 
Level 3 or higher centers for emergency 
management.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: The case referred from 
Level 1 or newly diagnosed case must be 
evaluated thoroughly. At this level, line of 
treatment to be planned considering Doshika  
involvement and cause of the Jwara . 
50 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJWARA (FEVER)
Vata-Pitta Trishna (thirst) Murchha
(fainting)Bhrama 
(giddiness)Daha  (Burning
sensation)Swapna-Nasha 
(insomnia)
Pitta-Kapha Tiktaasayata
(bittermouth)Tandra
(drowsiness)Kasa  
(coughing)Aruchi  
(anorexia)Muhurdaha-
muhurshitata  
(burning 
sensation 
alternate with 
chill)
Vata-Kapha Staimitya (cold 
sweat)Parvabheda
(jointpain)Gaurava  
(heaviness)Nidra  
(sleepiness)Pratishyaya 
(sneezing)
Sannipatika Nidranasha
(Insomnia)Bhrama  
(giddiness)Suptangata  
(numbness)Aruchi  
(anorexia)Stambha 
(Immobility)
Agantuja Glani
(malaise)Karshya
(emaciationGaurava  
(heaviness)Chetana-prabhav 
(emotions 
persistent)A
Table 6.4: Clinical features at the level of Dhatus .
Sl No Dhatu Clinical features
1 Rasa Guruta, Dainya, Udvega, Sadana, Chhardi, Arochaka, Angamarda, Jrimbha, Tapa
2 Rakta Ushna, Pidaka, Trishna, Sarakta Sthivana, Daha, Raga, Bhrama, Mada, Pralapa
3 Mamsa Antardaha, Trishna, Moha, Glani, Srista Vitkata, Daurgandhya, Gatra Vikshepa,
4 Meda Tivra Sweda, Tivra Pipasa, Pralapa, Abhikshna Vamana, Svagandhasya Asahatvam, 
Glani, Arochaka, 
5 Asthi Virechana, Vamana, Asthibheda, Prakujanam, Gatra Vikshepa, Shvasa,
6 Majja Hikka, Maha Shvasa, Kasa, Atitama Darshana, Marmachheda, Bahishaityam, 
Antardaha
7 Shukra Shukra Moksha and Mrityu
Table 6.5: Management of Jwara at level 2 as per Dhatugata Avastha7
Sl No Dhatu Management
Kalpas Panchakarma
1 Rasa Rasa Pachaka, (Kalinga, Patola Patra, Kutaki) Vamana, Upavasa
2 Rakta Rakta Pachaka (Patola, Sariva, Musta, Patha, Kutki) Seka, Pradeha, 
Samshaman
3 Mamsa Nimba, Patol, Triphala, Draksha, Musta, Kutaja Vireka, Upavasa
JWARA (FEVER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 51Investigation: Same as Level 1
1. Widal test
2. Urine – culture and sensitivity 
3. Sputum
4. Mantoux test
5. X-ray Chest PA view Treatment:  In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, following drugs may 
be added as per the requirement and status 
of the patient. 4 Meda 1. Kiratatikta, Guduchi, Chandana, Shunthi.
2. Mahaushadhadi Kwath (Shunthi, Guduchi, Musta, 
Chandana, Ushira, Dhanyaka)8Vireka, Upavasa
5 Asthi 1. Guduchi, Amalaka, Musta,
2. Vasadi Kwath (Vasa, Dhatri, Pathya, Nagara)9
3. Pathyadi Kwath (Haritaki, Shaliparni, Shunthi, 
Devdaru, Amalaki, Vasa)10Niruha and Anuvasana 
Basti
6 Majja — Niruha  and Anuvasana 
Basti
7 Shukra — —
Table 6.6: Medicines at level 2 for Jwara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Pathyadi Kwatha 
(in Sama Jwara  of 
more than 8 days)Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meals once 
dailyUpto 8 
days-
Sanjivini Vati11Vati 1-2 tab Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks Warm water
Amrutottaram 
Kwatha12Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks -
Amritarishta13Arishta 10-20 ml Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
Tribhuvanakirti 
Rasa Vati14Vati 125-250 mg Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks Water / Madhu
Ananda Bhairava 
Rasa15Vati 125-250 mg Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks Water / Madhu
Jayamangala Rasa16Vati 125-250 mg Before meal / 
thrice daily1-2 weeks Water / Madhu
Note:  Sanjivani Vati is specifically indicated in Amavastha of Jwara, Jayamangala Rasa in Sannipatika Jwara. 
Tribhuvanakirti Rasa is specifically indicated in Shlaishmika Jwara and Ananda Bhairavarasa in Jwara with 
Atisara.
52 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJWARA (FEVER)
Table 6.7: Comparative features for various type of Jwara
Fever type Dengue  
(Sannipataj Jwara )Malaria  
(Vishama Jwara )Influenza  
(Vata-Shlesmika Jwara )
Symptoms Sudden-onset fever, 
headache, muscle & 
joint pains, and rashesFever with rigor, 
fatigue vomiting and 
headache.
In severe cases it can 
cause seizures, coma 
or death.High fever with chills or 
sometimes with rigor, runny 
nose, sore throat, muscle 
pain, headache, coughing, 
watery eyes with irritation 
and feeling of tiredness. 
Occasionally there may be 
nausea and vomiting.
Differential 
diagnosisMalaria, leptospirosis, 
viral hemorrhagic 
fever, typhoid fever, 
meningococcal 
disease, measles, 
influenza, Swine flu, 
Congo feverDengue, typhoid 
fever, influenza, 
measles,Rhinitis, initial stage of 
dengue fever, typhoid fever
Clinical 
diagnosisThe diagnosis of 
dengue is typically 
made clinically, 
findings of fever 
plus any two of the 
symptoms from 
nausea & vomiting, 
rash, generalized 
pains.
Signs:  positive 
tourniquet test, (>10 
patches / inch2)Cyclic occurrence 
of sudden coldness 
followed by shivering, 
fever and sweating. Symptoms including fever 
with chill ( Sheet Purvaka 
Jwara ), running nose ( Nasa 
Srava ), sore throat, headache 
(Shirahshoola ), muscle pain 
(Angamarda ), coughing 
(Kasa ), no desire to have 
food ( Aruchi ), watery eyes 
(Nayanaplava ), and lethargy 
(Klama )Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as Level 1.
Referral Criteria: Patients not respond -
ing to Level 1 and 2 shall be referred to  
Level 3.LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical diagnosis: At this level, confirma -
tion of various advanced or acute fevers can 
be done and accordingly wherever needed, 
the following medicines can be started as per 
the type of fever.
JWARA (FEVER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 53Investigations 1. Virus isolation 
in cultures by PCR 
(Polymerase  Chain  
Reaction) - Day 1st to 
5th
2. Viral antigen 
detection (such as for 
NS1) – Day 1st to 7th
3. Serological tests: 
IgM &, IgG (2nd ) – 
Day 4th onwards
IgG (1st) – Day 7th on 
wards1. Peripheral smear 
for malarial parasite
2. Rapid slide method 
(Antigen based 
diagnosis) to confirm 
malaria and its type.
3. Urine -Routine, 
Microscope, Bile 
salt & Pigment – to 
rule out presence of 
black water fever and 
presence of jaundice
LFT, RFT and EEG 
may be done to assess 
the status of organs.To precise the type of flu like 
swine flu (H1N1) or bird flu 
(H5N1) below mentioned 
investigations are carried out:
1. Polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR)
2. Viral culture from nasal, 
pharyngeal, or throat 
aspirates.
3. Serology
Treatment On the line of  
Vata-Pittaja JwaraOn the line of 
Sannipatika Jwara  
considering 
DhatugatavastaOn the line of Vatashlaismika 
Jwara
Table 6.8: Medicines for Dengue fever
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administration Duration Anupana Remarks
Kalingadi 
Kashaya17Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meals / 
twice a day 5-7 days ---
Patoladi Kwath18Kwatha 10-20 ml Before meals / 
twice a day1 week Honey
Truna 
Panchamoola 
Kashaya19Kwatha 40 ml 2 to 3 time 5-7 days --- Acidosis 
condition
Praval Pisthi Churna 250mg Twice a day 5 days Gokshura 
kashayaAcidosis 
condition
AkikaPishti20Churna 250-500 
mgTwice a day 5 days Madhu  / 
GaudugdhaIf bleeding 
present
Bhoonimbadi 
Kwatha21Kwatha 12–24 ml Twice a day 5 days Madhu Elevated 
PT, OT 
level, 
bleeding 
condition
54 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJWARA (FEVER)
Table 6.9: Medicines for Influenza 
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Sudarshana Churn a22Churna 2-4 gm 2 to 3 time 3 days Warm water
Tribhuvankirti Rasa23Vati 125-250 
mgTwice a day 3 days Madhu , fresh 
Ardraka Swarasa , 
Tulsi Patra Swarasa
Naradiya Laxmi 
Vilasa Rasa24Vati 250 mg 2 to 3 time 3 to 4 
daysTambula Swarasa
Jwaraghni Gutika25Vati 1-2 tab 
(250mg)Twice 3 to 5 
daysGuduchi Swarasa
Talisadya Churna26Churna 3 gm Three time 1 week Madhu 
Chandramrit Rasa27Churna 250 mg 2 to 3 time 1 week Madhu , Ardraka  
Swarasa , juice of 
Vasa  leaves
Shrungyadi Churna28Churna 250 mg. to 
1 gmThree time 1 week Madhu 
Karpuradi Churna29Churna 1 to 2 gm. Twice 3 to 5 
days Madhu
Jwarahara Kashaya30Kwatha 40 ml Twice 10 days ----
Barihat Kasturi 
Bhairava Rasa31Churna 125 mg 1 to 2 time a day 2 to 3 Ardraka Swarasa, 
Madhu
Mrutyunjaya Rasa32Churna 125 mg 2 time a day 3 to 5 
daysFresh ginger juice, 
Madhu
Laxminarayana Rasa33Churna 250 mg Twice a day 3 to 5 
daysMadhu , Tambula 
Swarasa
Table 6.10: Medicines for Malaria
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Tulasi Swarasa34Swarasa 5-10 ml Twice or thrice 
a day3 to 5 days Trikart Churna  + 
Madhu
Sudarshana 
GhanavatiVati 1-3 Vati  
(250-500 mg)Twice or thrice 
a day3 to 5 days Luke warm water
Kshudradi 
Kwatha35Kwatha 20-40 ml Twice a day 3 to 5 days 
and more 
if neededWater
JWARA (FEVER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 55Bhunimbadi 
Kwatha36Kwatha 20-40 ml Twice a day 15 days Water
Ayush 6437Vati 4 Tab
(500 mg)Twice a day 5 to 7 days Water
Kirata Tiktakadi 
Kwath38*Kwatha 20-40 ml Twice a day 15 days Water 
Vishama 
Jwarantak 
Lauha39**Churna 125 mg Twice a day 15 days Madhu  
Sarva Jwarahara
Lauha40Churna 125 mg Twice a day 5 to 7 days Madhu
Jayamangal Rasa41Churna 125 mg Twice a day 7 days Madhu/Guduchi  
Swarasa  
Brihat Kasturi 
Bhairava Rasa42***Churna 125 mg Twice a day 3 – 5 days Madhu , Ardrak 
Swarasa
Vardhaman 
Pippali 
Prayoga43**Pippali 
processed 
in milk0.5-5gm 
(daily dose 
changes)Once in 
morning21 days
* In case of repeated fever
** In case of Spleenomegaly, Pandu
*** In case of respiratory involvement, hypotension
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and Life Style): Same as Level 144
1 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara  5/70 , In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 
2 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara  5/66 , In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, vol IV (39)
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18/4), 20005 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (10/13),  
2000
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7/35),  
2000
7 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, ChkitsaSthana 
3/200-202, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2007. REFERENCES
56 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESJWARA (FEVER)
8 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara, 5/372, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 
2009 
9 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara, 5/374, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 
2009 
10 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara, 5/376, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 
2009 
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12/35),  
2000
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4/1), 2000
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1/2), 2000
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/20), 2000
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/3), 2000
16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (16/61),  
2000
17 Astanga Hridaya Chikitsa 1/48-50: Comm. 
By Sarvangasundara by Arunadatta and 
Ayurveda Rasayana of Hemadri annotated 
by Dr, Anna Moreswar Kunte and Krishna 
Ramachandra Sastriavre, edited by Pt. Hari 
Sadashiva Sastri Paradakara, Chaukhambha 
Surabharati Prakashan, Varanasi.18 Astanga Hridaya Sutra 15/15: Comm. 
By Sarvangasundara by Arunadatta and 
Ayurveda Rasayana of Hemadri annotated 
by Dr, Anna Moreswar Kunte and Krishna 
Ramachandra Sastri Avre, edited by Pt. Hari 
Sadashiva Sastri Paradakara, Chaukhambha 
Surabharati Prakashan, Varanasi.
19 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4/8), 2000
20 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (13/1), 2000
21 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Jwaradhikara, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 2009 
22 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 7/35), 2000
23 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 20/20 ), 2000
24 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 20/39 ), 
2000
25 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 10/15 ), 
2000
26 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 7/13), 
2000
27 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 20/16 ), 
2000
JWARA (FEVER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 5728 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 7/31), 
2000
29 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 7/6), 2000
30 Agnivesha, Charaka Samhita with 
Ayurveda Deepika commentary by 
Chakrapanidatta Chi.3/200-6, Ed. By 
Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011
31 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 20/24 ), 
2000
32 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/30), 
2000
33 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I ( 20/38 ), 
2000
34 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khand 1/10; Pt. Parashuram 
Shastri Vidyasagar. 1sted, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi 2006.
35 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khand 2/10; Pt. Parashuram Shastri Vidyasagar. 1sted, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi 2006.
36 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khand 2/20; Pt. Parashuram 
Shastri Vidyasagar. 1sted, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi 
37 CCRAS patented
38 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chkitsa 
Sthana 3/343, In: Yadavji Trikamji 
Acharya, Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba 
Sanskrit Sansthan; 2009. 
39 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (17/3), 
2000
40 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (17/4), 
2000
41 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (16/61), 
2000
42 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/24), 
2000
43 Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chkitsa 
Sthana 1/3, In: Yadavji Trikamji 
Acharya, Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba 
Sanskrit Sansthan; 2009.  
INTRODUCTION AND  
CASE DEFINITION:
Pandu  is a disease classification involving 
mainly the Rasa Dhatu  with Panduta (pallor) 
as the presenting cardinal symptom. Other 
associated symptoms are fatigue, malaise, 
fever, weight loss, night sweats, palpitation, 
dyspnoea on mild exertion. Various disease 
conditions affecting formation of hemoglobin 
falls under the umbrella of Pandu Roga .
Clinical signs and symptoms of Pandu  
(Anemia):
Pandu  is a disease of Pittaja  dominance with 
following presenting signs and symptoms 
1. Depleted functions of Dhatus  in which 
Pitta  is vitiated
2. Kshaya  of Varna , Bala, Sneha  and other 
properties of Oja 
3. Raktalpata
4. Alpa Meda
5. Debility of relevant Karmendriya  and 
Jnanendriya
6. Discoloration 
Classification of Pandu Roga :
5 types: Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sannipataja, 
Mridbhakshanaja 
Differential diagnosis of Pandu :
1. Krimi Roga2. Kamala
3. Jwara – Vishama Jwara
4. Rajayakshma 
5. Grahani Roga
6. Udara Roga
7. Shotha – Kaphaja 
8. Arsha 
9. Asrigdara
10. Shosha
11. Raktapitta 
12. Other nutritional deficiencies - folic acid, 
Vit B12, Vit. C, protein, copper etc.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation, patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of Pandu
Investigations: Though much can be 
diagnosed based on the clinical signs and 
symptoms, laboratory investigations help 
the clinician to confirm the diagnosis and 
rule out other conditions 
• Hemogram and peripheral blood 
smear
• Urine – routine and microscopic 
examination
• Stool – occult bloodPANDU (ANEMIA)
PANDU (ANEMIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 59
Treatment: 
Table 7.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pandu
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Amalaki Churna Churna 3 gm Every morning 2-3 months Madhu/ warm 
water
Pippali Churna Churna 1 gm Twice daily 2-3 months Madhu/ water
Chausastha 
Prahari PippaliChurna 500 mg – 1gm Twice daily 2-3 months Madhu/ water
Guda Haritaki Churna 3 gm Every morning 2-3 months Honey/ warm 
water
Chitrakadi Vati Vati 500 mg After meals 1 month Warm water / 
butter milk
Drakshadi 
Kashaya1Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal/ 
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Punarnavadi 
Kashaya2Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks -
Phalatrikadi 
KwathaKwatha 20-40 ml Before meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks -
Drakshavaleha3 Avaleha 5-10 gm Before meal/ 
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Punarnava 
Mandoora4Churna 250-500 mg After meal / thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Madhu/ Takra
Dadimadya Ghrita Ghee 5-10 ml Before meal/ 
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm milk
• Vihara : Following of daily and 
seasonal regimen
Don’ts– 
• Ahara : Avoid excessive use of 
Kshara, Amla, Lavana, Katu, Kashaya, 
Atiushna, Tikshna, Rukshanna, 
Viruddha Asatmya Bhojana, Masha, 
Tila, Mridbhakshana and Dusta Jala 
• Vihara : Atinidra , Ativyayama , 
Atiayasa, psychological stress, 
Divaswapna , Ratri Jagarana  and 
VegavarodhaWhenever needed symptomatic treatment 
of associated conditions can also been done 
e.g. if patients complains of loss of appetite, 
Chitrakadi Vati  1-2 tablet after meal twice or 
thrice daily can also be added.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s–
• Ahara : Purana Shali , Yava, Laja, 
Amraphala, Draksha, Dadima, 
Matulunga, Kadaliphala , Kharjura. 
60 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPANDU (ANEMIA)
Referral criteria: Patient not responding to 
above mentioned management and showing 
advanced signs and symptoms of Pandu .
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as Level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Table 7.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pandu
Drugs Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Dhatri Lauha5Churna 250-500 mg After meal/thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Buttermilk
Gomutra Haritaki6Churna/
Vati2-3 gm/1-2 
tabs Before meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Navayasa Lauha7Vati / 
Churna250-500 mg After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Madhu
Vidangadi Lauha8Churna 250-500 mg After / thrice 
daily meal2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Swarnamakshika 
BhasmaBhasma 125-250 mg Every morning 2-3 weeks Madhu
Kasisa Bhasma Bhasma 125-250 mg Every morning 2-3 weeks Madhu
Lohasava9Asava 10-20 ml After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Draksharishta10Arishta 10-20 ml After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Punarnavasava11Asava 10-20 ml After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Shilajitvadi Loha12Vati 125-250 mg Twice daily 2-3 months Brahma 
Rasayana 
Avaleha13Investigation:  Same as level 1. In addition
• Test for sickling anaemia 
• Cytometric classification  of Anemia 
ought to be done.
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. 
PANDU (ANEMIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 61As per the status of the patient, Mrudu 
Virechana /Koshtha Shuddhi  with Avipattikara 
Churna  5-10 gm with Phalatrikadi Kashaya  may 
be done for the first few days of the treatment.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as Level 1
Referral criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
2. Pandu  cases with complications 
3. Severe Pandu  cases
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as Level 1for a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigation: Same as level 1 and 2. In 
addition
• Bone marrow cytology
Treatment: In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level 2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures indicated for Pandu  can be 
performed.
• Shodhana Chikitsa:
Virechana : with Aragwadha Phala Majja/ 
Avipattikara Churna/ Sushka Draksha Kwatha
• Rasayana Chikitsa:
• Vardhamana Pippali Rasayana
• Swarna Malini Vasant Rasa
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa Sthana Jwara 
Chikitsa 1/55,p. no. 395
2 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Udara Rogadhikar 
40/31-32, p. 733
3 Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa Sthana, Pandu 
Chikitsa 16/29-31, p. no. 541 4 Agnivesha, Charaka, Dridhabala, Charaka 
Samhita, Edited by Vaidya Yadavji Trikamji 
Acharya, Reprint Edition, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Publication, 2011 Chikitsa 
Sthana Pandu Chikitsa Adhyaya 16/93-96, 
p.no. 530 
5 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Pandu Rogadhikar 
12/30, p.378
6 Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa Sthana Pandu 
Chikitsa 16/29-31
62 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPANDU (ANEMIA)
10 Sharangdharacharya, Sharangadhara 
Samhita, Madhyama Khanda 10, Tra. 
Himsagar Chandra Murty, Varanasi, 
Chaukhambha Surabharati Series, 2007 
11 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Shotha Rogadhikar 
42/111-115, p.786
12 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Rajayakshma 
Rogadhikar 14/86, 7 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Pandu Rogadhikar 
12/28, p.378
8 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashan, Varanasi, Pandu Rogadhikar 
12/31, p.378
9 Sharangdharacharya, Sharangadhara 
Samhita, Madhyama Khanda 10, Tra. 
Himsagar Chandra Murty, Varanasi, 
Chaukhambha Surabharati Series, 2007 
Raktavaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Ekakushtha  is one among eleven Kshudra 
Kushta  with the dominance of Vata  and Kapha, 
which is characterized by silvery plaques like 
fish scales may be associated with itching 
and with tendency to spread all over the 
body.  It can be correlated with psoriasis like 
diseases. Along with faulty dietary habits, 
psychogenic stress also plays important role 
in the pathogenesis of Ekakushtha.
Case Definition: 
A patient presenting with dry scaling 
erythematous / maculopapulous patches, 
covered with adherent silvery white scales 
which may or may not be associated with 
itching.
Differential Diagnosis 
1. Sidhma : White colored shiny patches 
associated with or without itching along 
with exfoliation in the form of dust.
2. Dadru : Circular patches with elevated 
periphery associated with severe itchingLine of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Vamana, 
Virechana, Rakta Mokshana, 
• Shamana Chikitsa  – Pachana , 
Raktashodhana, external applications  
(Lepa, Taila  and  Dhara Chikitsa)
• Rasayana Chikitsa  for Rasa – Rakta 
Prasadana .
• Treatment according to Doshik  
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Kushtha
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC / PHC
Investigations:  Nothing specific. 
Treatment : In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Ekakushta , 
along with diet restriction, two or more of 
following drugs may be given as per Doshic  
predominance:EKAKUSHTHA (PSORIASIS)
Table 8.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ekakushta
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Sariva1 Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu  / Luke 
warm water
Haridra2 Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu  / Luke 
warm water
66 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESEKAKUSHTHA (PSORIASIS)
Khadira3 Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu  / Luke 
warm water
Guduchi4Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu  / Luke 
warm water
Manjishtha5 Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu  / Luke 
warm water
Manjisthadi Kwatha6Kwatha 20-40 ml After meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks -
Mahatiktaka Kwatha Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Panchatiktakam Ghrita Ghrita 15 ml Before meal 2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Kaishora Guggulu7 Vati 1-2 Vati Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
• Vihara : Maintain hygiene, follow 
Dinacharya  and Ritucharya  properly
Don’t - 
• Ahara : Viruddha Ahara , Adhyashana  
(eating prior to the digestion of 
previous meals), excessive sour 
and salty food, exercise after heavy 
meal, Masha  (black gram), radish, 
refined flour products, fermented 
food, curd, fish, jaggery. 
• Vihara : Mental stress / anxiety, 
suppression of urges especially of 
vomiting, day-sleeping, excessive 
exposure to sun, unhygienic condi -
tions
Referral Criteria: 
• Patients not responding to above 
mentioned management.
• Need further investigationsWhenever needed, symptomatic treatment 
of associated conditions can also been done 
e.g. if patients complains of constipation, 
Avipattikara  Churna  or Swadishta Virechana 
Churna  in empty stomach early morning 
with luke warm water can be given.
External applications: 
Kshalana : Tankan Jala / Triphala Kwatha / 
Panchavalkala Kwatha 
Lepa : Jeevantyadi  Yamaka Lepa, Vajraka Taila, 
Mahamarichadi Taila, Gandhaka  Malahara, 
Karanja Taila , Jatyadi  Taila , Adityapaka Taila
Pathya - Apathya (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s -
• Ahara : Laghu  Anna  (light food), 
Tikta  Shaka  (bitter leafy vegetables), 
Purana  Dhanya  (seasoned grain), 
Yava  (barley), Godhuma  (wheat), 
Mudga  (green gram), Patola , 
EKAKUSHTHA (PSORIASIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 67LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation: Nothing specific
Table 8.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ekakushta
Compound 
formulationDosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Sarivadyasava8Asava 10-20 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Mahamanjisthadi 
Kwatha9 Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks-
Gandhaka Rasayana Vati 1-2 Vati 
(125-250 mg)After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water / Madhu
Khadirarishta10Arishta 10-20 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Aragwadharishta Arishta 10-20 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Arogyavardhini 
Vati11Vati 1-2 Vati 
(500 mg)After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Madhu  / water
Manibhadra Gudam Lehya 15-30 gm Every morning For 1 month Luke warm 
waterTreatment:  In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Rasaushadhi  (herbo-
mineral drugs) can be used at this level. 
Patient may be kept under observation while 
prescribing these kinds of medicines:
Local  application : Same as Level 1
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style educa -
tion):  Same as Level 1
Referral Criteria: 
• Patients not responding to above 
mentioned management and having 
extensive lesions all over body and 
unexposed parts
• Spreading lesions with increased 
itching or burning sensation LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation:  Skin biopsy if required.
Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2, if needed Panchakarma  
68 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESEKAKUSHTHA (PSORIASIS)
procedures indicated for Ekakushtha  can be 
performed.
Shodhana Chikitsa:  
• Vamana  
• Virechana  
• Raktamokshana : Siravedha, 
Jalookavacharana   Rasayana - Amalaki, Guduchi, Bhringaraja, 
Ghrita Bhrishta Haridra, Brahmi, 
Mandukaparni, Triphala, Khadira, Vidanga, 
Tuvaraka, Bhallataka, Bakuchi
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):  Same as Level 1.
REFERENCES
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, Vol. 
IV (24).
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, Vol. 
III (30).
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, part I,  
Vol. I (46).
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, part I,  
Vol. I (27).
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, part I,  
Vol. III (52).
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:24),  
2000.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5:2), 2000.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1:37), 2000.
9. Sharangadhara, Sharangadhar Samhita 
with commentary of Adhamal’s Dipika 
and Kashiram’s Gudharth Dipika, edited 
by Pandit Parshuram Shastry, 5th edition, 
Madhyam Khanda, Varanasi, Chuakhambha 
Orientalia 2002; 2/137-142.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1:14), 2000.
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:4), 
2000. 
INTRODUCTION
Kamala  is a disease of Pitta Dosha  involving 
Yakrit  characterized by yellow discoloration 
of skin, sclera, urine, stools, other body 
parts and mucous membranes. This can be 
correlated with jaundice. 
Case definition:
Kamala  (Jaundice) is the yellow discoloration 
of skin and mucous membranes associated 
with complaints like anorexia, malaise, 
indigestion and with or without palpable 
enlargement of liver.
Types:
• Kosthashrita
• Shakhashrita
• Halimaka  
• Kumbha  Kamala  
Differential Diagnosis
1. Pittaja Jwara
2. Pittaja Pandu
3. Pittaja Udara
Line of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.• Shodhana Chikitsa – Virechana
• Shamana Chikitsa : Pachana, Deepana, 
Snehana, Pittashamaka
• External applications -  Nil
• Rasayana Chikitsa  - Nil
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Pitta Vyadhi
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations:
• Blood for Hb, TLC (leucocytosis), 
DLC (neutrophilia)
• Serum bilirubin- Direct /Indirect
• Urine routine and microscopic 
examination
Treatment: In Koshtha-Shakhashrita Kamala,  
Pittahara Chikitsa and in  Shakhashrita 
Kamala , initially Kaphahara Chikitsa followed 
by Pittahara Chikitsa is prescribed . Some 
of the following medications can be  
advised.KAMALA  (JAUNDICE)
70 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKAMALA (JAUNDICE)
Table 9.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kamala
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Kumari Swarasa Fresh Juice 10-20 ml After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Honey/ water/ 
Ikshurasa
Katuki Churna  3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Honey/ water/ 
Ikshurasa
Kalamegha Churna  3-6 gm After meal/
thrice daily2-3 weeks Honey/ water/ 
Ikshurasa
Bhumyamalaki Churna  /
Juice3-6 gm/ 
10-20 mlAfter meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Honey/ water/ 
Ikshurasa
Phalatrikadi 
Kwatha1Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Drakshadi Kwatha2Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal/ 
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Vasaguduchyadi 
Kwatha 3Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Arogyavardhini 
Vati4Vati/Churna 1-2 Vati/ 
500 mg After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Honey/ water/ 
Ikshurasa
Referral criteria: Patient not responding to 
above mentioned management and showing 
signs of deep Jaundice; severe vomiting, pos -
ing danger of dehydration, signs of hepatic 
encephalopathy etc. 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation:  Same as level 1. In addition
• HBsAg positive
• LFT - Elevated amino transferase- 
ALT/AST > 45U/lit, disturbed Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education):
Do’s –
• Ahara : Khichadi  prepared from 
old rice ( Purana  Shali ), green 
gram, fruits like Draksha (dried 
grapes), sugarcane juice, Shritashita  
Jala (boiled and cooled water), 
vege Vatiles like Patola  (Trichosanthes  
dioica ), gourd, Haridra, Ardrak.
• Vihara : Complete rest
Don’ts - 
• Ahara : Heavy food, fried food 
articles, pungent food articles like 
chilli, alcohol
• Vihara : Excessive physical exercise, 
day sleep, 
KAMALA (JAUNDICE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 71albumin: globulin ratio; raised 
alkaline phosphatase; higher values 
of prothrombin time
• Lipid profile- increased values of  
S. Cholesterol, S. Triglyceride
• USG AbdomenTreatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Rasaushadhi  (herbo-
mineral drugs) or herbal drugs containing 
poisonous plants can be used at this level. 
Patient may be kept under observation while 
prescribing these kinds of medicines. 
Table 9.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kamala
Compound 
FormulationDosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Tiktakam Kwatha Decoction 40 ml Before meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks -
Patolakaturohinyadi 
Kwatha5Decoction 40 ml Before meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks
-
Mandoora Vataka6Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Buttermilk
Punarnava
Mandoora7Vati/ 
Churna1-2 Vati/ 
500 mg After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Buttermilk
Mridu Virechana : As per the status of the 
patient, Mridu Virechana /Koshtha Shuddhi  
with Avipattikara Churna  5-10 gm with 
Drakhshadi Kashaya  may be done for 3-5 days 
before treatment.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria:
1. Cases not responding to above 
mentioned therapy.
2. Patients having increased levels of 
bilirubin with mental confusion and 
altered sensorium
3. Severe persistent vomiting4. Not able to take anything orally due to 
vomiting and nausea
 LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation:
• Immuno assay for infective hepatitis
• Liver biopsy
• CT Scan
72 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKAMALA (JAUNDICE)
Treatment: In addition to the managements 
mentioned for Levels 1 and 2, Panchakarma  
procedures indicated for Kamala can be 
performed.
Shodhana Chikitsa
Indicated only in the patients who are 
having Uttama Bala  and can tolerate Shodhana 
procedures
Virechana
Vata-Pitta presentation of Kamala - Avipattikara 
Churna , Manibhadra Leha, Aragwadha Phala 
Majja , Draksha  KwathaBoth Vamana and Virechana can be 
done  in Kapha Pitta presentation
• Vamana  with Yashtimadhu Kwatha or 
Iskhu Rasa + Madana Phala
Rasayana Chikitsa
Guduchi - 3 to 6 gm with warm water for one 
month
Amalaki – 1-3 gm with water for one month
Haridra  - 3-6 gms with water for one month
Nimba  - 3-6 gms with water for one month
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education) : Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Chakrapani, Chakradatta, Indradev 
Tripathi, Vaidya Prabha hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Bhawan, Varanasi, 
Reprint 2014, Chakradatta Amlapitta 
Chikitsa 52/12, p.no. 296 
2 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev Gupt, 
Vidyotini hindi commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Edition Reprint 2008, Varanasi, 
Chikitsa Sthana Jwara Chikitsa 1/55, p. no. 
395 
3 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev Gupt, 
Vidyotini hindi commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Edition Reprint 2008, Varanasi, 
Chikitsa Sthana Pandu Chikitsa 16/13,  
p. no. 540 
4 Rasa Ratna Samuchchaya Vipadika Chikitsa 
Adhikara.5 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition 
Reprint 2008, Varanasi, Sutra Sthana 15/15,  
p. no. 141 
6 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya, Atridev Gupt, 
Vidyotini hindi commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Edition Reprint 2008, Varanasi, 
Chikitsa Sthana Pandu Chikitsa 16/16-19,  
p. no. 540
7 Agnivesha, Charaka, Dridhabala, Charaka 
Samhita, Edited by Vaidya Yadavji 
Trikamji, Reprint Edition, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Publication, 2011 Chikitsa 
Sthana Pandu Chikitsa Adhyaya 16/93-96,  
p.no.530
Medovaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Hypothyroidismis a clinical syndrome 
which results from deficiency of thyroid 
hormones.Iodine deficiency and autoim -
munity are the main causes of hypothyroid -
ism out of which autoimmunity is common 
in iodine replete areas.1 The features of 
Hypothyroidism closely resembles with 
Shotha. However, it can be correlated with  
Galaganda, when it is associated with swell -
ing over the neck.
Case Definition: 
Patients presenting with history of weight 
gain, puffy face, non-pitting edema over 
hands and feet, constipation, hair loss and 
menstrual abnormality.
Differential Diagnosis-
Hypothyroidism needs to be differentiated 
from Obesity, PCOS in women, thyroid 
lymphoma, addison disease, goiter and 
thyroid carcinoma. However, following 
clinical conditions similar to Shopha described 
in Ayurveda need to be differentiated. 
• Kaphaja Pandu : Gaurava  (heaviness 
in body), Tandra (sleepiness), 
Panduta (pallor), Klama (fatigue), 
Svasa (dyspnea on exertion), Aalasya 
(lethargy), Aruchi (loss of appetite), 
Svaragraha (hoarseness of voice), 
Ushnakamita  are the symptoms of 
Kaphaja Pandu .2• Sthaulya : overweight, exertional 
dysponea.
Line of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Vamana, 
Virechana, Lekhanabasti
• Shamana Chikitsa  - Pachana, Deepana, 
Udwartana, Swedana
• External applications - Lepa
• Rasayana Chikitsa  for Rasadhatu  and 
Medodhatu
• Treatment according to stages and 
Doshik involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
mainly for Kapha Dosha
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Investigations:  Though it can be clinically 
diagnosed based on the signs and symp -
toms, Laboratory investigations are essential 
to confirm the diagnosis and rule out other 
conditions
• CBC
• Serum T3, T4, TSH 
Treatment : In the initial stage when the pa -
tient is suspected to have hypothyroidism -
some of the following advice may be given 
along with diet restrictions:HYPOTHYROIDISM
76 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESHYPOTHYROIDISM
Table 10.1: Medicines at level 1 for Hypothyroidism
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Kanchnara 
Guggulu3Vati 2-3 Vati Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Chitrakadi Vati Vati 2-3 Vati Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Trikatu Churna Churna 2-3 gm Before food 2-3 weeks Gomutra  / Madhu / 
Luke warm water
Vyoshadi Guggulu Vati 2-3 Vati Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Varuna Shigru 
Kwatha4Kwatha 12-24 ml Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks -
Shuddha Guggulu5Vati 1-2 Vati Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Varanadi Kwatha Kwatha 10-15 ml Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks -
Dashamoola Kwatha Kwatha 12-24 ml Before meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks -
• Vihara : Sedentary life style, day 
sleep, munching.
Referral Criteria: Patients not responding to 
above mentioned management
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR 
SMALL HOSPITALS WITH 
BASICFACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigation: Same as level 1: in addition
• FT3 and FT4
• Thyroid antibodies
Treatment: If patient does not respond to the 
Shamana  treatments, the following approach 
may be adopted.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Kaphahara Ahara  like Yava  
(barley), Bajra (millet), Jovar (pearl 
millet), Ragi , vegetables like radish, 
Sarshapa , drumsticks, Gandeera 
(coleus) and spices like Shunthi , 
Jeeraka and Trikatu , buttermilk, 
Ushna Jala  (Luke warm water). 
• Vihara : Regular exercises, 
Yogasanas , Pranayama  like Surya 
Bhedana, Kapalbhati  etc.
Don’ts – 
• Ahara : Heavy food articles and fried 
preparation, refined foods such 
as white flour, black gram, peas, 
potatoes, curd, milk, fermented and 
bakery items, 
HYPOTHYROIDISM
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 77Table 10.2: Medicines at level 2 for Hypothyroidism
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Gomutra Haritaki Vati Vati 1-2 Vati Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Amapachana Vati Vati 1-2 Vati Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Arogyavardhini Rasa 
Vati6Vati 1-2 Vati Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Thrivrita Lehya Lehya 10-15 gm Early morning for 
Nitya Virechana2 weeks-
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1 & 2, few of the fol -
lowing treatment may be added as per the 
requirement and status of the patient.
Shodhana -
• Vamana Karma
• Virechana Karma
• Lekhana BastiLEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: As mentioned in  
Level 1
Investigation: As mentioned in Level  
1 & 2 .
Table 10.3: Medicines at level 3 for Hypothyroidism
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Phalatrikadi Kwatha7 Kwatha 10-15ml Before meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks-
Makandi, Kalamegh, 
Aswagndha and BrahmiChurna 3-5gm After meal / 
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Rasayana - 
• Shilajatu Rasayana8
• Vardhamana Pippali9
• Bhallataka Rasayana10• Gudardraka Prayoga
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level - 1
78 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESHYPOTHYROIDISM
1. Harrison’s principles of Internal Medicine, 
17th edition chap335 pg. no. 2229.
2. Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita 
edited by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi 2011: Chikitsa Sthana 16/23,24 
pg. no. 527.
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family  
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part “A” 
Formulations. 2000, Pg. no. 206.
4. Sri Govindacharya, Bhaisajya Ratnavali 
with Vidyotini Hindi commentary by Sri 
Kaviraja Ambikadutta Shastri, edited by 
Acharya Rajeshwaradutta Shastri, 36/4-6, 
18th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 2007, Pg. no. 713.
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, Part “B” Formulary 
of List of Single Drug of Plant Origin, 2000, 
Sr.no.353.6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Ministry of Health and Family Wel -
fare, Govt. of India, Part “A” Formulations. 
2000, Pg, no. 664.
7. Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita: 
Prameha Chikitsasthana 6/40, edited 
by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi 2011.
8. Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita: 
Charaka Chikitsasthana 1-3/48-59, edited 
by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi 2011.
9. Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita: 
Charaka Chikitsasthana 1-3/32-34, edited 
by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi 2011.
10. Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita: 
Charaka Chikitsasthana 1-3/13-17, edited 
by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi 2011.REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 
rameha  is one among the eight Maharoga  
(disorders needing serious concern) and 
explained as most important among 
Anushangi Roga  (chronic disorders) 
manifested as polyuria with turbidity in 
urine occurs due to vitiation of Kapha Dosha  
and Meda Dhatu . Madhumeha the commonest 
clinical presentation of  Prameha  can be 
compared to Diabetes Mellitus . All such 
diet and life style factors which increase 
Kapha, Meda and Kleda, contribute in the 
pathogenesis of  Madhumeha. Prameha  can be 
classified into two as Sthula Pramehi or Apathya 
Nimittaja Pramehi with clinical  features of 
obesity along with excessive frequency of 
urination. In the second variety, Vata may be 
dominantly involved, and such patients are 
lean and termed as Krisha Pramehi. Further 
Prameha  can be further classified into Kapha  
Prameha , Pitta  Prameha  and Vata  Prameha  
according Dosha  involvement. Kapha  Prameha  
is Sadhya  (curable), Pitta  Parmeha  is Yapya  
(manageable) and Vata  Prameha  is Asadhya  
(incurable).
Case Definition:
Excessive urination which may be associated 
with excessive thirst and hunger, lethargy, 
numbness or burning sensation in the 
extremities, calf muscle cramps or sudden 
loss of weight with raised blood sugar levels 
(BSL).General Diagnostic criteria 
1. Increased frequency of urine
2. Turbidity in urine
3. Excessive thirst & hunger
4. Lethargy
5. FBS >125 mg/dl and (or) PPBS >200 
mg/dl1 
Along with, any 2 or more of the following 
symptoms:
a. Like cool surroundings (Subjective) 
b. Sweetness in mouth (Subjective) 
c. Burning / Numbness in palms & 
soles (Subjective) 
d. Ants noted in the toilet (Subjective) 
Sthula  Pramehi : General Diagnostic criteria 
+ BMI > 25 
Krisha  Pramehi : General Diagnostic criteria 
+ BMI < 18 
Kapha  Pramehi : General Diagnostic criteria + 
BMI > 25 with some of the following features
• Recent onset of Diabetes (< 2 years)
• Take excessive sweets and high 
calorie diet
• Bulk eating habit
• Indigestion, predominant upper 
GIT symptoms and recurrent Upper 
Respiratory Tract symptomsMADHUMEHA  (DIABETES MELLITUS)
80 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
Pitta  Pramehi : General Diagnostic criteria + 
BMI >18 and <25 with some of the following 
features
• Medium onset of Diabetes (2-6 
years)
• Use of excessive spicy and salty diet
• Moderate eating habit
• Acidity predominant, upper GIT 
symptoms and recurrent Urinary 
Tract Infections
Vata  Pramehi : General Diagnostic criteria 
+ BMI < 18 with some of the following  
features
• Chronic onset of Diabetes (> 6 years)
• Use of dry low nutritional diet
• Less eating habit
Differential Diagnosis: 
• Sthoulya
• MutratisaraLEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as with subtypes 
as Sthula  / Krisha  and Doshik  variety Kapha / 
Pitta / Vata . Patients diagnosed as Sthula  / 
Kapha  / Pitta  and having at least moderate 
physical strength and blood sugar level as 
follows may be treated at this level.
• FBS >110 upto 180
• PPBS > 200 upto 280
Investigation:
• Blood-sugar level
• Urine- sugar
Treatment : In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild raised blood sugar 
levels and not associated with major 
complications, along with diet restriction, 
two or more of following drugs may be given 
as in table 11.1:
Table 11.1: Medicines at level 1 for Madhumeha
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationDosha  
Specification Anupana
Vijayasaradi 
KwathaDecoction 10-15 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayKapha  / Pitta -
Phalatrikadi
Kwatha1Decoction 10-15 ml Before meal / 
twice dailyKapha  / Pitta -
Kathakakhadiradi 
KashayaDecoction 10-15 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayKapha -
Nisha Katakadi 
KashayaDecoction 10-15 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayPitta -
 Nisha-Amalaki2 Powder 6 gm After meal / twice 
a dayIrrespective of 
DoshaWith water
Mamajjaka Ghana 
VatiVati 2-3 Tab Before meal /
thrice a day- With water
MADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 81Sapta Rgangyadi 
Vati3Vati 2-3 Tab Before meal /
thrice a day- With water
Gokshuradi 
Guggulu4Vati 2-3 
tabletBefore meal /
thrice a dayPaittika  with 
UTIWith water
Triphala5 Powder / 
Tab3-6 gm / 
2-3 TabBefore meal /
thrice a dayWith warm 
water
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style education):
are recommended. Bitter leafy 
vegetables like fenugreek, Atasi  
(Flaxseed), Sarshapa  (mustard) are 
recommended; roasted meat of dry 
habitats animals Do’s- 
• Ahara : Use of Purana Dhanya  
(grains harvested 1 year back), 
Bharjit Dhanya  (roasted grains), 
Yava  (Barley), Mudga  (Green 
grams) and Kulattha  (Horse grams), 
Adhaki , Masura  (Lentils), Makushtha  
Table 11.2: Chart Showing various diet Useful in Prameha
Type of Diet Name
Cereals Yava (Barley) (Hordeum vulgare), godh£ma (wheat), kodrava (grain variety –Paspolum 
scrobiculatum) udd¡laka (according to dhanvantari Nighantu  forest variety of k°drava ), 
Kangu (Seteria italica), Madhulika (Elusine coracana), Shyamaka (Echinochloea 
frumentacea), Jurnahva (Sorghum vulgare), Vajranna (Pennisatum typhoides), 
Purana shali (old rice),.
Pulses Adhaki (red gram-Cajamus cajan), kulattha (horse gram) and mudga (green gram), 
Masura (Lentils), Makushtha (Moth Bean/Acpnite bean), Chanaka (Cicer arietinum) 
should be taken with bitter and astringent leafy vegetables.
Vegetables Navapatola (young Tricosanthus dioica), young vegetables variety of banana, 
tanduleyaka (Amaranthus spinosus), vastukam (bathuva), all bitter vegetables 
(tiktasakam ) like methika (Fenugreek leaves), Karavellaka (Bitter gourd), Bimbi 
(Kovai), Shigru fruits and leaves (Drum stick), Vrintaka (Brinjal), Rakta vrintaka 
(Tomato), Putiha (mint leaves), Suran (amorhophellus), Curry leaves, Mulaka 
(radish), Kushmanda (Ash Gourd), Kritavedhana (Ridge gourd), Alabu  
(Bottle gourd), 
Fruits Jambu (Syzigium cumini ), Kapitha (Feronia limonia ), Amlaki (Phyllanthus embilica ), Bilva  
(Bael - Aegle marmelos ), Dadima  (Pomegranate - Punica granatum ), Naranga  (Orange 
- Citrus aurantium ), Parushaka  (Falsa  - Gravia  asiatica ), Udumbara  (Cluster Fig – Ficus 
racemosa ) etc fruits.
Flesh Birds like Kapota  (Pigeon), Titira  (Grey Francolin)
82 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
Oils
CondimentsAtasi (Linum usitatisimum), Sarshapa (mustard).
Haridra  (Turmeric), Maricha  (Pepper), Tvak  (Cinnamon), Lashuna  (Garlic), Shunthi  
(Ginger), Methika  (Fenugreek), Dhanyaka  (Coriander), Jeeraka  (Cumin seeds)
• Vihara : Ayurvedic texts suggest 
Long walks, swimming, hard 
labor like pulling carts, digging 
wells, serving animals etc. All this 
involves muscular activity, which 
will help in maintaining muscle 
tone and peripheral utilization of 
glucose.  Today, weight training 
exercises can be done. Following 
norms should be followed before or 
after exercise: 
• Exercise should be initiated at low 
intensity and should be gradually 
increased
• It should not be done after eating 
heavy meals.
• It should be done regularly at fixed 
timings.
• Before exercise, a person should 
have taken proper sleep, his diet 
should have been digested properly. 
Don’ts – 
• Ahara : Excessive use of sweets, 
fruit salad, Sugarcane, fruits like 
Mango, Watermelon, Chikoo, 
Dates, Jack fruits, Custard apple,  
Banana, Grapes, Cashew nuts, and 
other fruits with high glycemic 
index, use of cold drinks, intake 
of oil, Hydrogenated Ghee, fried 
food, over indulgence of meat 
especially of wet land animals, to 
take food before complete digestion 
of previous food, to take food 
in improper time and in varied 
quantity.• Vihara : Day time sleep especially 
just after taking heavy meal, 
irregular pattern of sleep i.e. less 
than 5 hours or more than 10 hours 
in a day or in improper way, no or 
less or infrequent exercise.
Referral Criteria: Patient not responding 
to above mentioned management in terms 
of symptomatology and reduction in blood 
sugar levels and developing signs of compli -
cation of Diabetes may be referred to the next 
level.
LEVEL 2: AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL 
WITH INDOOR FACILITIES:
All patients referred from level 1 and those 
patients diagnosed as Krisha  Parmehi  / Vata  / 
Durbala  / Pitta  with Medo Dushti  may be 
treated at this level
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation: Same as level 1; in addition
1. Hb A1C
2. Lipid profile
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the require -
ment and status of the patient (Table 11.3).  
Rasaushadhi  (Herbo-mineral drugs) or herb -
al drugs of potential pharmaco-vigilance 
importance can be used at this level. Patient 
may be kept under observation while pre -
scribing these kinds of medicin es. 
MADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 83Table 11.3: Medicines at level 2 for Prameha
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationSpecific 
indicationsAnupana
Shiva Gutika6Vati 1-2 tablet Before meal / 
twice a dayDiabetic 
Impotence, 
Neuropathy-
Vanga Bhasma7 Powder 125-250 mg After meal / 
twice a day Water
 Trivanga Bhasma8Powder 125-250 mg After meal / 
twice a day Water
Vasanta Kusumakara 
Rasa9Powder 125-250 mg After meal / 
twice a dayDiabetic 
peripheral 
neuropathy Water
Arogyavardhini Vati10Vati 1-2 tablet Before meal / 
thrice a dayWith 
water
Chandraprabha Vati11Vati 2-3 tablet Before meal / 
thrice a dayDiabetic 
nephropathyWith 
water
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education) : Same as level 1
Referral Criteria:  Patients’ blood sugar not 
well under control and having associated 
conditions like Macrovascular complications 
like Ischemic heart disease, microvascular 
complications like diabetic kidney disease, 
retinopathy, neuropathy etc may be referred 
to the next level.
LEVEL 3: HOSPITALS WITH 
INDOOR FACILITIES LIKE 
PANCHAKARMA , KSHARASUTRA  
ETC. AND HAVE 
INTEGRATIVE FACILITIES
All patients referred from level 2 should be 
treated at this level. All patients come under 
Sthula Pramehi /  Balavan  / Kapha  / Pitta  
Pramehi  and willing to undergo Shodhana  line of management for better recovery should 
be treated at this level. All patients of Krisha  
Pramehi  / Vata  / Durbala  should be treated 
at this level. Patients having HbA1c above 9 
should be treated at this level.
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation:
1. Serum electrolytes
2. Blood urea and serum creatinine
3. Urine for Micro albumin
4. ECG
5. Fundus examination 
Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures can be performed.
84 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
• Udavartana  with Yava  Kolakulatha  
Churna , Triphala  powder or Yava  
powder
• Snehapana  with Sarshapa  Taila , 
Dhanwantaram  Ghrita , Kalyanakam  
Ghrita
• Vamana Karma  with Madanaphala 
Churna (5-10 gm), Pippali Churna 
(1-2 gm), Vacha Churna (2-3 
gm), Rock salt (5-6 gm), Honey 
(Q.S.), for Vamanopaga - Nimba  
Kashaya.
• Virechana with  Brihat Triphala 
Churna, Mishraka Sneha, 
• Asthapana Basti  prepared with 
decoction of drugs from Surasadi 
Gana  or Nyagrodhadi Gana .Patient with Apatarpana Janya  presentation 
(Vata  predominance)
1. Yapana Basti / Madhutailika Basti  with 
Erandamoola  Decoction, Shatapushpa  
paste, Honey and oil in equal quantity, 
Rock salt.
2. Anuvasana Basti with  Dhanwantaram 
Ghrita, Dhanwntaram Taila, Guggulu 
Tiktaka Ghrita
3. Shirodhara
4. Sarvanga taila / Kseeradhara
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education) : Same as level 1, along with 
modifications in diet and exercise should 
be made as per the strength and built of the 
concerned patient. Moderately nourishing 
article which do not aggravate Kapha  and 
Meda  can be advised.
REFERENCES
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4/16), 2000.
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I, Vol. I (30), 
2000.
3. Singh KS, Chandola H, Kaur M, Ravishankar 
B. Evaluation of Saptarangyadi Ghanavati in 
the management of Apathyanimittaja 
Prameha w.s.r. to type-2 diabetes mellitus. 
AYU 2012; 33: 368-73
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (5/3), 2003, pg 67.5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (7/15), 2003, pg 110.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (12/28), 2003, pg 193.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (18/15), 2003, pg 242.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (18/06), 2003, pg 236.
MADHUMEHA (DIABETES MELLITUS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 859. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (20/42), 2003, pg 273.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (20/4), 2003, pg 258.
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2nd Revised English 
ed. Part I (12/10), 2003, pg 185.
INTRODUCTION
Sthaulya  is excessive body weight due to 
vitiated status of Kapha , Rasa  and Meda . 
Certain genetic characteristics may increase 
an individual’s susceptibility to excess body 
weight. Atisthaulya  has been discussed under 
Ashtanindita Purusha  (eight undesirable 
conditions). 
Case Definition
Increased body mass i.e. BMI more than 
>25 (kg/m2) associated with pendulous 
abdomen-buttocks-breasts, dyspnea on 
exertion, weakness, excessive perspiration 
and hunger, is termed as Sthaulya . 
Differential Diagnosis: 
•	Metabolic syndrome, 
•	Hypothyroidism, 
•	Cushing syndrome 
•	PCOD
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  Clinical presentation 
i.e. overweight/obese, BMI more than 25  
(kg/m2), waist circumference value more 
than 80 cm in female and 102 cm in male, 
patient can be diagnosed as case of Sthaulya. Investigations : Nothing specific
Examination:
•	BMI which includes weight 
measurements
•	Waist circumference values
•	Anthropometry measurements
Treatment:  Obesity being life style disorder, 
diet restriction, physical exercise with life 
style modification is the most important part 
of management. 
•	If the patient presents with features 
of Ama  and impaired digestion, 
for the beginning few days Trikatu  
powder or a mixture of Haritaki, 
Guduchi  and Shunthi  powder in the 
dose of 3-6 gm, before meal twice 
daily shall be given for 2-3 weeks 
with lukewarm water. 
•	Similarly, patient complaining of 
constipation and low appetite shall 
be treated first with laxatives like 
Triphala  powder or Haritaki  powder 
5-6 gm twice daily empty stomach 
with lukewarm water. 
•	In addition, patient may be 
encouraged to drink medicated 
warm water like Musta Siddha Jala, 
Triphala Siddha Jala  instead of taking 
normal water.STHOULYA  (OBESITY)
STHOULYA (OBESITY)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 87
Table 12.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sthaulya
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Triphala Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
twice daily4-8 weeks Luke warm water
Musta1 Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks Luke warm water
Haritaki2 Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks  Luke warm water
Katuki3Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks  Luke warm water
Vidanga Churna4Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks Luke warm water
Gomutra Haritaki5 Vati 3-6 gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Phalatrikadi Kwatha6Kwatha 20-40 ml Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Kanchanara 
Guggulu7Vati 0-5 -1gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Triphala Guggulu8Vati 0.5-1gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Medohara Guggulu Vati 0.5-1gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Vidangadi Lauha9Vati 250-500 
mgBefore meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Abhayarishta10 Arishta  10-20 ml After meal/  
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
Arogyavardhini11 Vati 250-500 
mg Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Note:  selection of above drugs depends upon the status of obesity, e.g.
powder or Triphala  Guggulu  Vati or 
Gomutra Haritaki Vati along with 
strict diet and life style modification.
• Patients having BMI between 30 and 
35, may be given above mentioned 
drugs with Anupana  of Phalatrikadi • Patients having overweight i.e. 
BMI between 25 and 30 and have 
no other associated conditions like 
hypothyroidism or positive family 
history of obesity, may be given 
drugs like Triphala  powder, Haritaki  
88 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSTHOULYA (OBESITY)
Kwatha or drugs like Kanchanara 
Guggulu, Medohara Guggulu or 
Vidangadi Lauha may be added. 
Patients having  Udavarta like 
pathogenesis i.e. chronic history 
of severe constipation  and having  
Kapha dominant  Prakriti may be 
better treated with  Arogyvardhini, 
Abhyarishta, Katuki powder or  
Gomutra Haritaki Vati.
• Patients having BMI more than 35 
and having genetic predisposition 
may be given long term manage -
ment and if needed, may be re -
ferred to higher centers for better  
management.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s –
• Ahara : Chapatti  prepared with Yava 
(barley), maize, millet like Jowara, 
Ragi;  regular use of  Laja (puffed rice/
grains), Moonga Daal  (green gram) 
with or without husk or sprouted or 
Tuvar  Daal  in food. Use of fruits like 
papaya, orange, sweet lemon, co -
conut water, salads prepared with 
cucumber, carrot, radish, spinach 
etc. Vegetables soups prepared of 
Patola  (Trichosanthes  dioica ), gourd 
etc. Luke warm water and seasoned 
honey.
• Vihara : Waking up early morning, 
regular exercises, brisk walking, 
swimming, playing outdoor games, 
Yoga.
Don’ts–
• Ahara : Heavy fried food, black 
gram, refined foods such as white flour, peas, chick peas, potatoes, 
curd, milk, fermented and bakery 
items, day sleep,
• Vihra : excess sleep and sedentary 
life style 
Referral criteria: Patients not responding 
to above mentioned management, BMI 
more than 35, having genetic or hormonal 
involvement or uncontrolled hypertension, 
diabetes, hypothyroidism or IHD
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as Level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directly. 
Sthaulya  due to hormonal imbalance should 
be treated depending upon the underlying 
pathogenesis. 
Investigation: Same as level 1: In addition
•	Thyroid function test
Treatment:
•	Patient suffering from Hypothy -
roidism may be given additional 
treatment like Kanchanara Guggulu, 
Chincha Bhalltaka Vati, Varuna Shigru 
Kwatha, Amrutadi Guggulu, Vardha -
mana Pippali Rasayana. In addition, 
external treatment in the form of 
Udvartana  with Triphala Churna , 
barley powder or Bashpa Swedana 
may also be done.
•	Patients suffering from Diabetes 
Mellitus may be given Phalatrikadi 
Kwatha, Guduchyadi Kwatha,  
Shilajatu.
STHOULYA (OBESITY)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 89Table 12.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sthaulya
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Apamarga 
Tandula Churna  2-3 gm Before Meal/ 
twice daily1 Months Warm water 
Lohaarishta12 Arishta 5-10 ml After meal/
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
Shilajatu  Churna  500 mg Before meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Madhu/ warm 
water
Triphaladi Taila13Taila 10-20 ml Before meal/ 
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Treatment: In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level 2, Panchakarma  procedures 
as follows:
Vamana : 
• Vamana  Karma  but for Snehana  
should be either avoided or oil 
should be used instead of Ghrita1.
Virechana : 
• Virechana  Karma  with Triphala 
Kwatha  100 ml along with Eranda  
(castor) oil 40 ml or any other 
suitable Virechana Kalpa
Tikshna Basti : Kshara Basti, Lekhana Basti
Rasayana : 
1. Shilajatu Rasayana Kalpa
2. Amalaki Rasayana Kalpa
3. Vardhamana Pippali Rasayana Kalpa
4. Vidangadi Rasayana Kalpa
5. Haritakyadi Rasayana Kalpa
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as Level 1In addition to it, 
Mridu Virechana : As per the status of the 
patient, Mridu Virechana /Koshtha Shuddhi  
with Haritaki powder  5-10 gm with warm 
water 3-5 days before treatment. Similarly 
patient may be kept on fasting for early few 
days.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
Referral criteria : Cases not respond -
ing to above therapy and needs further 
management in the form of Panchakarma   
procedures.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as Level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation: Hormonal assessment for 
endocrinal disorders
90 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSTHOULYA (OBESITY)
1 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I,  
vol. III (59)
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I,  
vol. I (31)
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I,  
vol. II (40)
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoe -
ia of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I, vol. I (77),2000
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7/8), 2000
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4/16), 20007 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5/1), 2000
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5/5), 2000
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (21/10), 2000
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1/1), 2000
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20/4), 2000
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (1/32), 2000
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8/21), 2000REFERENCES
Purishavaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Arsha  is defined that the mass which is 
formed in Guda  by pathological involvement 
of Twak , Mamsa  and Meda.  Moreover it is also 
opined by Charaka that a projection which 
is produced in Guda  is called Arsha,  while in 
other places of body is known as Adhimansa.
Arsha  (Haemorrhoids) has been primarily 
classified into two types like Shushka and  
Ardra, Sahaja  (congenital) and Jatottara  (origi -
nated later on due to its own causes). Consid -
ering Doshic  dominance, it is again classified 
into four varieties i.e. Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja  
& Shonitaja . Two or three Doshas  together can 
produce mixed types of Arsha . Four kinds of treatments have been mentioned for Arsha  i.e. 
Shastrakarma  (surgical treatment), Agnikarma  
(cauterization), Ksharkarma (cauterization 
with alkali) and Shaman Chikitsa  (medicines).
Case Definition:
Feeling of external mass in anal region 
associated with or without bleeding and 
pain. It usually occur at the level of Ano-
rectal ring and prolapsed through anus at 3, 
7 and 11 o’clock positions.
Various Presentations:
According to the predominance of particular 
Dosha , following presentations of the disease 
may be found.ARSHA  (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
Table 13.1: Types of Arsha with their characteristics
Features Vatika Paittika Kaphaja Raktaja
Morphology 
of Pile massWrinkled, 
hard, rough, 
dry, dusky red 
coloured pile 
mass, Shape like 
Karpasa Phala  or 
Kadamba PuspaSoft, flabby and 
delicate, red 
yellow black or 
blue coloured pile 
mass, Shape like 
Jalauka  or Yava Large sized, 
protuberant, smooth, 
rigid and benumbed, 
pale or white coloured 
pile mass shape like 
Karira , Panasa  Ashti , 
GaustanaShape like Vata , 
Gunja  seed, 
Vidruma
Discharge  Absent Foul smelling 
thin yellowish red 
dischargecontinuous and 
profound discharge 
of tawny, whitish or 
reddish and slimy 
fluid-
Bleeding - Present  - Severe
Vega Retention of 
flatus, urine and 
feces- - -
94 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESARSHA (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
Colour of 
Twak , Nakha , 
Mukha , Netra , 
Mala  and 
MutraBlackish Yellowish or 
greenishWhitish
-
On palpation - Tender Painless Hot
Associated 
FeaturesColicky, pricking 
pain, twitching, 
tinglingBurning sensation, 
itching, pricking 
pain and tendency 
to suppurationThick & long standing 
swelling, excessive 
itchingLoss of strength 
& valour, senses 
become weaker, 
Immunity 
decreases
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentations, patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of Arsha.
Investigations:  At this level, no specific test 
is needed to be performed.
Treatment:  In the initial stage, when the 
patient is having mild features of Arsha , 
along with diet restriction, two or more of 
following drugs may be given:Differential Diagnosis:
• Rectal prolapse ( Gudabhramsa )
• Fissure-in-ano ( Parikartika )
• Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s 
disease
• Condyloma Acuminata
• Proctitis
• Ano-rectal warts
• Ano-rectal abscess
• Rectal polyp
• Malignant tumours  (Arbuda ) 
Table 13.2: Medicines at level 1 for Arsha
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Haritaki Churna1 Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Triphala Churna2Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Draksha3Dried 
fruit10-20 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
ARSHA (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 95Aragvadha4Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Castor oil5Oil 10-20 ml Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning1-2 weeks Luke
warm water
Avipattikara
Churna6Churna 5-10 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning2-5 days Water
Piplayadi Ghrita7Ghrita 5 gm Twice daily before 
meals1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Takrarishta8Arishta 10 -20 ml Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Abhayarishta9Arishta 10 -20 ml Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Surana Vataka10Vataka 500 mg Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Eranda Bhristha 
HaritakiChurna 3-5 gm Empty stomach / bed 
time or early morning 2-5 days Luke warm 
water
spinach and vegetables prepared 
from green leafy vegetables, Surana , 
Patola , gourd, intake of sufficient 
quantity of warm water. 
• Vihara : Regular exercises like 
walking, jogging, outdoor games, 
following daily & seasonal regimen 
properly.
Don’ts -
• Ahara : Heavy food articles and 
preparation, green peas, black eyed 
beans, yellow gram, raw vegetables 
and salads, refined foods such as 
white flour, cabbage, cauliflower, 
brinjal, peas, potato.
• Vihara : Jobs involving sedentary 
activities, continuous standing, Local Application:
• Parishek : Arka11, Eranda12, Bilvapatra  
Kwatha13 
• Avagaha : Triphala Kvatha14, 
Panchavalkala  Kwatha
• Dhoopana : Arkamoola15 and 
Shamipatra16 
• Abhyanga : Jatyadi Taila17, Murivenna
Matra Basti : Jatyadi Taila Pippalyadi Taila
Patha-Apathya  (Diet and life style): 
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Green gram, fruits like 
Draksha , orange juice, sweet lemon 
juice, musk melon, salads prepared 
from cabbage, cucumber, carrot, 
96 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESARSHA (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
sitting for long durations on hard 
seats, continuous cycling or bike 
riding etc. 
Referral criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to the therapy
2. All case of moderate to severe bleeding 
per rectum
3. Cases with complications
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: The diagnosis is made on 
the basis of criteria mentioned in level-1 for 
fresh cases. The case referred from level-1 or fresh case must be evaluated thoroughly for 
any complication.
Examination: 
• Per rectal examination
• Proctoscopic examination
Investigations: 
• CBC
• Special investigations like ECG, 
Chest X-Ray may also be required 
for surgical fitness of patients who 
requires operation.
Treatment: Treatment given in level-1 
may be continued. Following medicines 
may be added; patient may be kept under 
observation while prescribing these kinds of 
medicines. 
Table 13.3: Medicines at level 2 for Arsha
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Arogyvardhini Vati18 Vati 1-2 Vati At bed time or early 
morning empty 
stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Arshakuthara Rasa19Vati 1-2 Vati At bed time or early 
morning empty 
stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Kankayana Vati20Vati 1-2 Vati At bed time or early 
morning empty 
stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Phalatrikadi Kwatha21Kwatha 20-40 ml Empty stomach / 
twice a day1-2 weeks -
Erandamula Kwatha22Kwatha 20-40 ml Empty stomach / 
twice a day1-2 weeks -
ARSHA (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 97Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria: 
• Patients with severe bleeding per 
rectum. 
• Patients having severe anaemia, 
who needs blood transfusion. 
• Piles cases associated with other 
disorders like heart disease, 
uncontrolled BP, DM, HIV positive, 
HbsAg positive, VDRL positive, 
malignancy etc. 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigations: Same as level 2
Treatment: At this level, in addition to 
treatment options of level 1 and 2, the 
following treatment options should also  
be tried. 
Kshara Karma  (potential  
cauterization)
1. Kshara Pratisarana
2. Kshara Sutra  ligation
3. Agni Karma (direct cauterization) 
4. Shastra Karma (surgical management)
5. Classical Virechana Karma
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.1, pg. 31.
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.7, pg. 15.
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 3, pg. 21.
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.1, pg. 5.5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 3, pg. 23.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.7, pg. 2.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.6, pg. 29.
8. Agnivesha, Charaka Samhita, Chakrapani 
commentary, Yadavji Trikamaji Acharya, 
editor, Varanasi: Chaukhambha Surbharti 
98 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESARSHA (HAEMORRHOIDS / PILES)
Prakashana, Reprint 2011. Chikitsasthana, 
Arsha Chikitsa Adhyaya (14/72-75), pg. 
505.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.1, pg. 1.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.12, pg. 
34).
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1,  
pg. 6.
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 3,  
pg. 23.
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and Fam -
ily Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Volume  
3 (15).
14. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.7, pg. 15.
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1,  
pg. 6.
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 6,  
pg. 62.
17. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.8,  
pg. 17.
18. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.20, pg. 4.
19. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 Vol.16, pg. 2.
20. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.12, pg. 5.
21. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 Vol.4,  
pg. 16.
22. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 3,  
pg. 23.
INTRODUCTION
Atisara  is an acute gastrointestinal disorder 
characterized with increased frequency of 
stools with loose motions.1 This could be cor -
related with various diarrhoeal conditions.
Case definition: 
Excessive passage of watery stools as -
sociated with discomfort in abdomen, cardiac, umbilical & anal region, and  
malaise.
Types:
Considering the cause, there are main types 
named as Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sannipataja, 
Amaja, Bhayaja / Shokaja . Depending upon the 
stage, classics have classified Atisara  as Sama  
or Nirama .ATISARA  (DIARROHEA)
Table 14.1: Types of Atisara with their characteristics
Types Symptoms
Aamatisara Unformed stool with excessive mucus with foul odour, usually associated with 
features of Ama  like flatulence, heaviness in abdomen or body, loss of appetite, 
lethargy. 
Pakvatisara Stool which is contrasting to characteristics and symptoms of Amatisara .
Vataja Patient frequently passes small quantity of liquid stool with flatus or froth, with 
discomfort or pain in abdomen, anus, thigh or sacral region, associated with 
horripilation, increased respiration, dryness of mouth, weakness
Pittaja Patient passes stool with yellow, green, black tinge which may contain blood with 
exceedingly foetid smell. Associated features may include increased thirst, burning 
sensation, sweating, fainting, colic pain, inflammation and suppuration in anus
Kaphaja Patient passes stool as unctuous, white, slimy, foetid smell mixed with mucus, with 
frequent colic pain, or tenesmus. Associated complains may include heaviness in 
abdomen, anus, pelvis and groin, horripilation, nausea, lassitude and aversion to food.
Sannipataja Mixed symptoms of Tridoshaja (incurable)
Bhayaja 
and ShokajaThe presentation of this variety is similar as Vataja Atisara. But in addition to it, 
psychological factors can be traced in the induction of loose stool
Differential Diagnosis:
1. Grahani
2. Pravahika3. Vishoochika
4. Krimiroga
5. Ajeerna
100 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATISARA (DIARROHEA)
Line of treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Nil
• Shamana Chikitsa - Langhana, Pachana, 
Deepana, Grahi, Stambhana
• External applications - Nil 
• Rasayana Chikitsa for Grahani
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Purishavaha Srotas
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation.
Investigations: Routine stool examination
Treatment: In the initial stage of Amatisara , 
it is not necessary to use Stambhana drugs. 
Pachana and Deepana should be advised.
Table 14.2: Medicines at level 1 for Atisara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shunthi Churna Churna 2-3 gm 3-4 times 1-2 days Takra
Sanjivani Vati2Vati 1-2 Vati Before food 2-3 
times a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Bilwadi Gutika3Vati 1-2 Vati Before food 2-3 
times a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Ativisha Churna4Churna 125-250 mg Before food 2-3 
times a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Bilwamoola Churna5Churna 1-2 gm Before food 2-3 
times a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Musta Churna6Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Dadima Phala Twak 
ChurnaChurna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Dadimashtaka 
Churna7Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesWater / fresh 
butter milk
Kutaja Churna8Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesWater / fresh 
butter milk
Balachaturbhadra 
Churna9Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesHoney / water
Kutajaghan Vati Vati 1-2 Vati After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesPlain water
Kutajarishta10Arista 10-20 ml After meal / 
thrice a dayTill symptom 
subsidesEqual amount 
water
ATISARA (DIARROHEA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 101LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigations: 
• Serum electrolytes 
• RFT 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Laja Manda , Peya, Vilepi , 
Khichadi , Shritasheeta Jala , Takra
• Vihara : Rest
Don’ts -
• Ahara : Heavy Food, sweets and 
cold items, milk and milk products 
except buttermilk 
• Vihara : Overeating, daytime sleep, 
night wakening, physical & mental 
stress
Referral criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
Table 14.3: Medicines at level 2 for Atisara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Bruhat Gangadhara11Churna 500 mg-2 gm After meal / 
thrice dailyTill symptom 
subsidesWater / fresh 
butter milk
Hingvastaka Churna12Churna 2-3 gm After meal / 
thrice dailyTill symptom 
subsidesWith water
Mustakaranjadi 
Kashaya13Kwatha 12-24 ml 6 am & 6 pm in 
empty stomachTill symptom 
subsides-
Anandabhairava Rasa14Churna 250-500 mg After meal / 
thrice dailyTill symptom 
subsidesWater
Shankha Vati15Vati 1-2 Vati After meal / 
thrice dailyTill symptom 
subsidesWater
Kutaja Avaleha16Granules 5-10 gm Before meal / 
twice dailyTill symptom 
subsides-
Karpoorasava17Asava 5-10 drops Before meal / 
twice dailyTill symptom 
subsides
102 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATISARA (DIARROHEA)
Investigation: 
• Stool culture 
• Rapid rotavirus antigen test in  
stool
• Antigen tests for Giardia , Crypto -
sporidium  and E. histolytica
• USG abdomen, colonoscopy 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1 & 2, some of the 
following can be advised.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1
Referral criteria: Cases not responding to 
above therapy.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: As mentioned above
Table 14.4: Medicines at level 3 for Atisara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Panchamruta 
Parpati KalpaChurna 125-250 mg This 
may be increased 
gradually upto 
750 mg.Before meal /
once a day10 days Madhu , Ghrita  
Bhrushta 
Jeeraka Churna
Karpura Rasa Vati 1-2 Vati Thrice a day Till symptom 
subsidesWater
Picchha Basti : 
Shalmali, Lodhra, 
Vatankura  and 
Yastimadhu Kalka 
mixed with ghee, 
milk, honeyEmulsion 400 ml Once a day Till symptom 
subsides-
1. Acharya Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita with 
Dalhana Commentary - Nibandhasangraha, 
and Gayadas Acharya commentary - 
Nyayachandrika Panjika on Nidanasthana, Uttartantra 40/6, edited By Vd. Jadavaji 
Trikamji Acharya & Narayana Ram Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surbharti Prakashana, 
Varanasi, 2008.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1 and 2.
REFERENCES
ATISARA (DIARROHEA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1032. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, PART “A” FORMULATIONS, 
Govt. of India, 2000. pg. 549.
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, PART “A” FORMULATIONS, 
Govt. of India, 2000. pg. 523.
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “B” 
FORMULARY OF SINGLE DRUGS, 2000, 
pg. 139.
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “B” 
FORMULARY OF SINGLE DRUGS, 2000, 
pg. 196.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “B” 
FORMULARY OF SINGLE DRUGS, 2000, 
pg. 678.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “B” 
FORMULARY OF SINGLE DRUGS, 2000, 
pg. 243.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “B” 
FORMULARY OF SINGLE DRUGS, 2000, 
pg. 576.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 337.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 36.
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 338.
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 353.
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 193.
14. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 663.
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 545.
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 118.
17. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. Of India, PART “A” 
FORMULATIONS. 2000, pg. 54.
INTRODUCTION
Bhagandara  is a Marmaasrita  Vyadhi  which 
affects Bhaga , Guda & Basti , characterized 
by the tract formation, tearing & multiple 
openings in the perineal region ( Bhaga 
Pradesha ) around anus & urethra, through 
which discharge of pus, urine, feces, semen, 
flatus etc. may occurs. It is a disease of 
Madhyama  Rogamarga  which lists under 
Ashta Mahagada . It is a Krichrasadhya  Vyadhi . 
According to Dosha  predominance, 8 types 
of Bhagandara  are described by different 
Acharyas. It can be compared to Fistula-in-
ano in terms of Modern Science.Case Definition: 
One or more than one external opening 
present anywhere around the anus i.e. in 
peri-anal area as an elevation of granulation 
tissue with discharge of pus and associated 
with pain and itching.
Various Presentations:
Due to predominance of particular Dosha , 
various kinds of presentations my found. 
Types described by Sushruta Acharya are as 
follows:BHAGANDARA  (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
Table 15.1: Types of Bhagandara with their characteristics
Features Shataponaka Ushtragriva Parisravi Shambuk-
avartaUnmargi
Dosha  
predominanceVatika Paittika Kaphaja Sannipatika Agantuja
Possible 
Modern 
CorrelationMultiple 
fistulas - -Horse shoe 
fistula -
Structural 
changeMultiple 
small, tiny 
openingsInitially red 
coloured thin 
boil followed 
by quick 
suppuration.Initially whitish, 
long standing 
boil developed 
in hard, smooth 
fistulaInitially a 
big boilUlceration 
converts into 
Kotha  and finally 
developed as 
Fistula
Discharge Profound, 
clean frothy 
dischargeFoul smelling, 
hot discharge.Continuous 
sticky and 
whitish 
dischargeDischarge 
of various 
colours-
Associated
symptomsCutting or 
pricking type 
pain.Severe 
burning.severe itching Pricking 
pain, 
burning 
and itching 
together.Krimi  (micro 
organism)
BHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 105
Three more types are mentioned by Vagbhata Acharya which comes under Dosha  Samsargaja  
variety. 
Table 15.2: Another classification of Bhagandara based on Dosha  Samsarga
Features Parikshepi Riju Arsho
Doshik
predominanceVata Pittaja Vata Kaphaja Kapha Pittaja
Structural change Circular fistula 
around anusStraight fistula Tear in 
rectumSwelling, later 
developed as fistula
Discharge - - Continuous discharge
Associated
Symptoms- -Severe itching & 
burning
Examination:  Following examinations will 
help in the confirmation of diagnosis.
 Hard stool mass with line of pus/
blood on the direction of fistulous tract  
opening
1. Palpation:  One can feel indurated tract, 
fresh discharge of pus on palpation and 
mild tenderness.
2. Digital Examination (Per-rectal): It can 
reveal internal opening palpable as a 
nodule, which can be in the straight line 
to the external opening or at 6 o’clock in 
lithotomy position and about middle of 
the anal canal.
Treatment: In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Bhagandara , 
along with diet restriction, two or more of 
following drugs may be given.Differential Diagnosis: 
• Arsha  (Haemorrhoids)
• Gudabhramsha  (Rectal prolapse)
• Parikartika  (Fissure-in-ano) 
• Ano-rectal carcinoma
• Ano-rectal abscess 
• Diverticular Disease
• Herpes Simplex
• Inflammatory Bowel Disease
• Pilonidal Cyst and Sinus
• Proctitis
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC 
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation, patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of Bhagandara.  
106 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESBHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
Table 15.3: Medicines at level 1 for Bhagandara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Haritaki Churna1Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning 2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Triphala  Churna2Churna 2-4
gmEmpty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Draksha3 Dried fruit 10-20 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Aragvadha4 Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Castor oil5Oil 10-20 ml Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Avipattikara  
Churna6Churna 5-10 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning2-5 days Water
Abhayarishta7Arishta 10-20 ml After meals / 
twice a day 1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Thriphala Guggulu8Vati 500 mg  
(2 Vati)After meals / 
thrice a day1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Surana  Vataka9Vataka 500 mg After meals / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
from cabbage, cucumber, carrot and 
spinach, green leafy vegetables, 
Surana , Patola , gourd, intake of 
sufficient quantity of warm water. 
• Vihara : Regular exercises like 
walking, jogging, outdoor games, 
following daily & seasonal regimen 
properly.
Don’ts – 
• Ahara : Heavy food articles and 
preparations, green peas, black eyed 
beans, yellow gram, raw vegetables Local or External Application:
v	 Ushnodaka  Avagaha  (Hot sitz bath) 
with 100 ml of Panchavalkala  Kwatha  
or Triphala Kwatha10 twice a day
v	 Jatyadi Taila11, 5-10 ml P/R, twice a 
day, after Ushnodaka  Avagaha
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style): 
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Green gram, fruits like 
Draksha , orange juice, sweet lemon 
juice, musk melon, salads prepared 
BHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 107and salads, refined foods such as 
white flour, cabbage, cauliflower, 
brinjal, peas, potatoes
• Vihara : Jobs involving sedentary 
activities, continuous standing, or 
sitting for long durations on hard 
seats, continuous bicycle, bike or 
horse riding etc. 
Referral Criteria: 
• Cases not responding to above 
therapy.
• Development of complications 
• Fistula-in-ano cases associated 
with one or more of the following 
conditions: 
1. Pregnancy
2. Uncontrolled Tuberculosis 
3. Uncontrolled Hypertension 
4. Uncontrolled Diabetes mellitusLEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for fresh 
cases reporting directly. A patient presenting 
in an advance stage of Fistula-in-ano would 
have Doshika  Lakshanas  of Bhagandara  and 
after examining the case thoroughly, the 
selection of drugs may be done.
Investigations: 
1) Digital Examination
2) Proctoscopy
3) Fistulogram
4) Trans-rectal Ultrasonography
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Patient should be 
kept under observation while prescribing 
these kinds of medicines. 
Table 15.4: Medicines at level 2 for Bhagandara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Guggulu 
Panchapala Ch.Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning2-3 weeks Madhu
Yogaraja Churna* Churna 2-4 gm Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning2-3 weeks Madhu
Arogyvardhini 
Vati12 Vati 1-2 Vati Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke
warm water
Arshakuthara 
Rasa13Vati 1-2 Vati Empty stomach / 
at bed time or early 
morning1-2 weeks Luke
warm water
108 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESBHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
Drakshasava14Asava 20-40 ml After meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Kumaryasava15Asava 20-40 ml After meal / 
twice a day1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Phalatrikadi 
Kwatha16 Kwatha 20-40 ml Empty stomach / 
twice a day1-2 weeks -
Erandamula 
Kwatha  Kwatha 20-40 ml Empty stomach / 
twice a day1-2 weeks -
Trayodashanga 
Guggulu17Vati 2-3 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Shodashanaga 
GugguluVati 2-3 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Kaishore 
Guggulu18Vati 2-3 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Saptavimshati 
Guggulu19*Vati 2-3 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
* Contraindicated in  Pitta Rakta  predominance
Investigations:  Same as level 2
Treatment:  At this level, the following 
treatment options may be applied in addition 
to treatment option available at level 1 and 2.
In addition to the treatment prescribed in 
level-1 and 2, following procedures can be 
done
1. Classical Vamana Karma
2. Classical Virechana Karma
Management for Pakwa Bhagandara 
Pidika :
Shastra Karma : After proper Snehana  and 
Swedana , Pakwa  Pidika  should be incised and 
drained from most prominent and dependent 
part. After that packing should be done with 
sterilized dressing materials and bandage it 
properly. From next day onwards, dressing 
should be changed daily with appropriate Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level -1  
Referral Criteria:
1. Cases not responding to above therapy
2. Cases needing surgical intervention 
(Shastra  Karma / Ksharasutra  Chikitsa )
3. Associated with diseases like Osteomy -
elitis, chronic or acute Ulcerative Colitis, 
Crohn’s disease etc.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
BHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 109Shodhana  materials. After complete Shodhana  
of Vrana , Ropana  Karma  should be done with 
appropriate drugs.
Management  for established cases of 
Bhagandara :
• Shastra Karma• Ksharasutra Chikitsa: Ksharasutra 
can be prepared with  Haridra20, 
Snuhiksheera21, Arkaksheera22 etc.
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Note:  Treatment of Parikartika  can also be 
applied in the management of Bhagandara .
REFERENCES
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.1 (31).
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:15).
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 3 (21).
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol.1 (5).
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol 3 (23).
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:2).
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (1:1).
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (5:5).
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12:34).10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:15).
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (8:17).
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (20: 4).
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (16 : 2).
14. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (1 : 1).
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1, (36).
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2, (4 : 16).
17. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1, (5 : 4).
18. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (5: 2).
110 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESBHAGANDARA (FISTULA-IN-ANO)
19. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (5: 11).
20. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Volume 1 
(30).21. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Volume 1 
(63).
22. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Volume 1 (6).
INTRODUCTION
All small organisms ranging from insects 
to parasites and to micro-organisms can be 
classified under the term Krimi . 
Case definition : Acute infestation may 
present with epigastric pain, peri-umbilical 
pain, diarrhea etc. Chronic worm infestation 
is associated with Pandu Roga, Guda Kandu , 
weakness and lassitude. 
Classification of Krimi : 
• Drishta (visible) and Adrishta  
(invisible to naked eye)
• Sahaja  (non-pathogenic) and 
Vaikarika  (pathogenic)
• Bahya  (external) and Abhyantara  
(internal)
• Abhyantara  (internal) 
Krimi  are further classified as:
• Shleshmaja , Purishaja  and Raktaja
Differential Diagnosis:
• Parasites lodging in various 
organs have symptoms related to 
these organs such as pneumonitis, 
abdominal colic, hepatitis, pluritis 
and epileptic seizures.• Dermatological symptoms are 
seen due to larva penetration and 
migration as in the case of peri anal 
dermatitis, vaginitis etc.
• Chronic cases of infestation suffer 
from malnutrition and anemia.
• Children bear stigma of poor 
growth and development.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:
• Clinical features of Krimi Roga : 
Diarrhoea, halitosis, pallor, 
abdominal pain, anemia, headache
• Cases of chronic infestations present 
with the history of abdominal colics, 
intermittent diarrhoea, vomiting, 
signs of malnutrition and poor 
growth.
• Children with Enterobius  infection 
suffer from peri-anal pruritus and 
sleep disturbance. Young adult 
with recent onset of epilepsy needs 
to be investigated for cysticercosis.
Investigations: 
Stools – routine and microscopicKRIMI  (INTESTINAL WORM INFESTATION)
112 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKRIMI (INTESTINAL WORM INFESTATION)
Table 16.1: Medicines at level 1 for Krimi
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Vidangadi Churna1Churna  500 mg -2 
gmAfter meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Palasha Beejadi 
Churna2Churna /  
Vati250-500 mg 
/ 1-2 tablet After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Kampillaka Churna3Churna  250-500 mg After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Nimbadi Churna4Churna  250-500 mg 
1-2 tablet After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Parasika Yavani 
Churna5Churna /  
Vati250-500 mg 
/ 1-2 tablet After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Krimimudagara 
Rasa6Churna /  
Vati250-500 mg After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Krimikuthara Rasa7Churna /  
Vati250-500 mg After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Vidanga Avaleha Avaleha 5-10 gm After meal thrice 
daily28 days Luke warm 
water
Krimighna Vati Vati 1-2 tablet After meal thrice 
daily1 month Luke warm 
water
Vidangarishta Arista liquid 10-30 ml Twice daily after 
mealOne month Luke warm 
water
• Vihara : Suppression of natural 
urges, Adhyashana .
Referral criteria: 
1. Neurological complication such as 
seizures or radiological evidence of 
cysticercosis of brain.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES 
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as Level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s–
• Ahara : Laghu and Ushna  diet, red 
rice (unpolished), Kulattha , wheat, 
barley, Patol , brinjal , garlic, Shigru , 
chili, black pepper, Methi  seeds, hot 
water
Dont’s–
• Ahara: Fish, Tila, milk, sour food , 
green leafy vegetables , Amla Phala 
(citrus fruits)  Dadhi, buffalo milk, 
jaggery , sweets , Pishtanna (items 
prepared with white flour).Treatment:  In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Krimi, two or more of following drugs may be  
given
KRIMI (INTESTINAL WORM INFESTATION)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 113Investigations: Nothing specific
Treatment: Same as Level 1. In addition to it 
if needed following can be done:
• Apakarsana: with any of the  
following suitable Karma  – Vamana / 
Virechana / Asthapana Basti / 
Shirovirechana  • Any of the following drugs 
may be used – Mulaka, Sarshapa, 
Lashuna, Karanja, Shigru, Apamarga, 
Tulasi, Nirgundi, Mushakaparni,  
Bhallataka  
• External applications:  Katu Taila  
[mustard oil] in anus region
Table 16.2: Medicines at level 2 for Krimi
Drugs Dosage 
form Dose Time of 
administration Duration Anupana
Paribhadra (Erythrina 
indica) Patra SwarasaJuice 10-30 ml Once in the morning 
empty stomachOne week Honey
Pootikaranja Swarasa Juice 10-30 ml Once in the morning 
empty stomachOne week Honey
Haridra Khanda Granules 5-10 gm Twice daily after food 1 month Warm 
water
Vidanga Churna Churna 500 mg For nasal 
administration 
(Pradhamana Nasya)Once a 
weekNil
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
Referral criteria:
• Evidence of complications like per -
foration, migration or obstruction 
due to nematodes.
• Neurological/ hepatic complica -
tions due to cestode infection caus -
ing liver abscess or cysticerosis.
• Children below 2 years with 
associated malnutrition.LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigations:
• Same as level 2 for a fresh case 
reporting directly.
114 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKRIMI (INTESTINAL WORM INFESTATION)
• Ultrasound abdomen (for localizing 
hydatid cysts and ascaris in 
migrated sites.)
Treatment:
• Same as Level 2 for uncomplicated 
cases.• Classical Virechana Karma
• Niruha Basti  prepared with Krimihara  
drugs.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as in Level 1 
REFERENCES
1 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Krimi 
Rogadhikara 11/17, 
2 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Krimi 
Rogadhikara 11/12, 
3 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Krimi 
Rogadhikara 11/11, 
4 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
Vatarakta Rogadhikara 27/27-34, 
5 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Krimi 
Rogadhikara 11/15-16, 
6 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhamba Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Krimi 
Rogadhikara 11/42-43, 
7 Rasatantra Sara va Siddha Prayoga 
Sangraha, Kharaliya Rasayana, 60
INTRODUCTION
Parikarthika  is not mentioned as a separate 
disease entity in any of the Brihattrayi  or 
Laghuthrayi . Acharya Charaka described it 
as one among the Dasha  Virechana  Vyapat . 
Athiyoga  of Virechana , Atisara , constipation 
etc. are the predisposing factors of Parikartika . 
In modern science, it is correlated with 
fissure-in–ano/painful defecation.
Case Definition:
Feeling of sharp cutting pain in anal orifice 
during and or after defecation associated 
with fresh bleeding usually in the form of a 
streak on passing of hard feces, with itching 
or burning in anal region.
Differential Diagnosis:
1) Lower bowel inflammatory diseases like 
ulcerative colitis2) Intestinal Tuberculosis
3) Carcinoma of large bowel
4) Pruritis Ani of varied etiology
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation, patient can 
be diagnosed provisionally as a case of 
Parikartika.
Investigations : At this level, no specific test 
is needed to be performed
Treatment:  Chikitsa  should aim at Anulomana , 
Ropana  & Sulahara , deworming.
In the initial stage when the patient is having 
mild features of Parikartika  such as hard stool 
mass with painful defecation, along with diet 
restriction, two or more of following drugs 
may be given, in addition to local treatment.PARIKARTIKA 
(FISSURE-IN-ANO/ PAINFUL DEFECATION)
Table 17.1: Medicines at level 1 for Parikartika
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Haritaki1Churna 2-4 gm At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach2-3 weeks Luke warm 
water
Triphala2Churna 2-4 gm At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Draksha3 Dried fruit 10-20 gm At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Aragvadha  4Churna  2-4 gm At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
116 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPARIKARTIKA (FISSURE-IN-ANO/ PAINFUL DEFECATION)
Castor oil5Oil 10-20 ml At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Avipattikara  
Churna6Churna 5-10 gm At bed time or early 
morning empty stomach2-5 days Water
Takrarishta  Arishta  10-20 ml Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Abhayarishta7 Arishta  10-20 ml Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Surana  
Vataka8Vatak 500 mg Twice daily after meals 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Don’ts–
Ahara : Heavy food articles and preparations, 
green peas, black eyed beans, yellow gram, 
raw vegetables and salads, refined foods such 
as white flour, Cabbage, cauliflower, brinjal, 
peas, potatoes, regular intake of chilled water
Vihara : Jobs involving sedentary activities, 
continuous standing, or sitting for long 
durations on hard seats, suppression 
of natural urges especially urination & 
defecation etc. 
Referral criteria : Refer to level 2
1. Cases not responding to the therapy and 
develop complications.
2. All case of moderate to severe bleeding 
per rectum.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis:  The diagnosis is made 
on the basis of criteria mentioned in level 1 
for fresh cases. The case referred from level Local Application:
Parisheka : Arka ,9 Eranda,10 Bilvapatra  Kwatha11 
Avagaha : Triphala Kwatha,12 Panchavalkala  
Kwatha
Dhoopana : Arkamoola13 and Shamipatra14 
Abhyanga : Jatyadi Taila,15 Murivenna
Matra Basti:  Jatyadi Taila,16 Pippalyadi Taila
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s–
• Ahara : Green gram, fruits like 
Draksha, orange juice, sweet lemon 
juice, musk melon, salads prepared 
from cabbage, cucumber, carrot, 
spinach and vegetables prepared 
from green leafy vegetables, Surana , 
Patola , intake of sufficient quantity 
of warm water. 
• Vihara : Regular exercises like 
walking, jogging, outdoor games, 
following daily & seasonal regimen 
properly.
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 117PARIKARTIKA (FISSURE-IN-ANO/ PAINFUL DEFECATION)
1 or fresh case must be evaluated thoroughly 
for any complication.
Investigations:
• Per rectal examination
• Proctoscopic examination Treatment:  In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Patient should be 
kept under observation while prescribing 
these kinds of medicines. 
Table 17.2: Medicines at level 2 for Parikartika
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Arogyvardhini 
Vati 17Vati 1-2 Vati at bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Kankayana Vati18Vati 1-2 Vati at bed time or early 
morning empty stomach1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Phalatrikadi 
Kwatha19 Decoction 20-40 ml empty stomach/twice 
daily1-2 weeks -
Erandamoola 
Kwatha20 Decoction 20-40 ml empty stomach/twice 
daily1-2 weeks -
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria: 
• Patients with severe bleeding per 
rectum. 
• Patients having severe anaemia, 
who need blood transfusion, 
• Haemorrhoids associated with 
heart disease, uncontrolled BP and 
DM, HIV positive HbsAg positive, 
VDRL positive, tuberculosis, malig -
nancy etc. LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL  
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 & 2 for 
fresh cases reporting directly.
Investigations:  If facilities are available, do 
the following investigation to confirm the 
diagnosis as well as to rule out the other 
pathologies.
1. Routine blood investigation 
118 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPARIKARTIKA (FISSURE-IN-ANO/ PAINFUL DEFECATION)
2. Ultra sonography of whole abdomen.
3. Proctoscopy 
4. Colonoscopy
Treatment: At this level, the following 
treatment options may be made available 
in addition to treatment option available at 
level 1 and 2. For un-responsive cases and 
chronic cases of fissure, various types of 
Basti , Ksharakarma  and surgical treatment 
may be opted.
1. Kshara  Karma  (potential cauterization)
2. Agni  Karma  (direct cauterization)
3. Shastra  Karma  (surgical management)
4. Classical Virechana  Karma
Pathya -Apathya  (diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1Treatment of Chronic Fissure-in-ano:
Methods:
• Kshara Sutra  Suturing  (KSS) at 
fissure bed with trans-fixation and 
ligation of sentinel tag (if present) 
after Lord’s Anal Dilatation.
• Anuvasana Basti : 3-5 ml of Anu 
Taila21 (oil) is inserted high in to 
the anal canal with the help of a 
catheter, twice daily.
• Sitz bath.
Note:  Treatment of Bhagandara  can 
also be applied in the management of  
Parikartika .
REFERENCES
1 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 1 (31)
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:15)
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (21)
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (5)
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (23)6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:2)
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (1:1)
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12:34)
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (6)
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (23)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 119PARIKARTIKA (FISSURE-IN-ANO/ PAINFUL DEFECATION)
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 3 (15)
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (7:15)
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 1 (6)
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 6 (62).
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (8:17),16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (8:17)
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (20: 4)
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (12: 5)
19 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 2 (4: 16)
20 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 Vol. 3 (23)
21 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1 (8:1)

Manovaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Anidra  is the sleep disorder caused by 
aggravated Vata and Pitta . It is characterized 
by difficulty in falling asleep at bedtime, 
waking up at night and having difficulty 
going back to sleep leading to daytime 
fatigue and loss of concentration. 
Case definition: 
Patients complaining of insufficient sleep, 
either due to delayed onset of sleep, or due 
to frequent awakening at night or early 
awakening and thus suffering from poor 
concentration, headache, fatigue can be 
diagnosed as a case of insomnia.
Differential Diagnosis:
• Nidanarthkara Anidra  due to any 
disease conditions – Muscle fatigue, 
restlessness, Diabetes, Asthma, 
Arthritis etc. 
• Vataja Madatyaya 
• Drug induced InsomniaLine of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Virechana, Nasya
• Shamana Chikitsa  - Snehana, 
Murdhataila, Shirolepa, Dhara
• Medhya Rasayana 
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC
Clinical diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations:  Nothing Specific
Treatment:  In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Anidra, 
two or more of following drugs may be  
given:ANIDRA (INSOMNIA)
Table 18.1: Medicines at level 1 for Anidra
Drug Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Sarpagandha 
Ghanavati1Vati 1-2 Vati
(Each of 500 
mg)After meal/at 
night 15 days to 
one monthWater
Jateephala Churna Churna 1-2 gm Bed time 15 days to 
one monthMilk
124 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESANIDRA (INSOMNIA)
Ashwagandhadi 
Churna2Churna 3-6 gm Bed time 15 days to 
one monthMilk
Sarpagandha
ChurnaChurna 250-500 mg After meal twice 
daily 15 days to 
one monthLukewarm 
water
Pippalimula 
churna3Churna 1-3 gm After meal twice 
daily 15 days to 
one monthJaggery
Tagara Churna 1-3 gm After meal twice 
daily 15 days to 
one monthWater
Saraswata Churna4Churna 3-5 gm After meal twice 
daily 15 days to 
one monthGhrita
• Vihara : Day sleep, mental and 
physical excitement before bed, 
suppression of natural urges.
Referral Criteria:  Refer to level 2
Cases that are not responding to above 
management 
LEVEL 2: CHCS OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis:  The diagnosis is 
made on the basis of criteria mentioned in  
level-1 
Investigations: Nothing specific
Treatment: Treatment given in level-1 may 
be continued. Following medicines may be 
added. Counselling must be done for insomnia due 
to stress or psychological reasons. Sarvanga 
Abhyanga in day time and  Shiro Abhyanga, 
Padaabhyanga, and Karnapoorana before sleep 
should be advised.
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): 
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Mamsarasa , Shali , ghee, curd, 
milk, wheat, sugarcane, sweets, 
grapes, sugar, black gram, sesame, 
Khaskhas  
• Vihara : Comfortable room and bed, 
regular bath, timely sleep , listening 
light music, Yoga and meditation
Dont’s -
• Ahara : Excessive use of spicy food, 
stimulants like coffee, tea, tobacco 
etc
ANIDRA (INSOMNIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 125Table 18.2: Medicines at level 2 for Anidra
Formulation Dosage 
formDose Time Duration Anupana
Mamsyadi Kwatha5Kwatha 20-40 ml
BDEmpty stomach / 
twice daily15 – 30 days -
Drakshadi Kwatha Kwatha 20-40 ml
BDEmpty stomach / 
twice daily15 – 30 days 
Sarswatarishta Arishta 10-15 ml At bed time 15 – 30 days Luke warm 
water
Nidrodaya Rasa6Vati 1-2 tab (each 
250 mg)After meal
twice a day15 – 30 days Milk
Investigations: According to clinical 
presentations
Treatment:  In addition to the treatment 
prescribed at level-1 and 2, following 
procedures can be done.
1. Shirodhara - Chandanadi  Taila , Ksheerabala 
Taila . It is usually done in Anxiety, 
Insomnia 
2. Shirobasti  - Chandanadi  Taila , Ksheerabala 
Taila.  It is beneficial to do Shirobasti  after 
proper purificatory procedures. But in 
cases where Shodhana  is not necessary it 
can be done directly.
3. Basti Karma: Tikta Ksheera Basti and 
Yapana Basti or Matra Basti
4. Nasya: Gau ghrita or Brahmi Ghrita
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):  Same as level 1External management:
• Shiro Pichu: Chandanadi Taila, 
Ksheerabala Taila 
• Shirolepa: Panchagandha Churna, 
Amalaki Churna etc. with  Takra
• Pratimarsha Nasya: Gau Ghrita or 
Brahmi Ghrita
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1
Referral Criteria: The cases those are not re -
sponding to above mentioned management. 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
126 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESANIDRA (INSOMNIA)
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi,  
2003:181.
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:112.
3. Bhaishajya Ratnavali of Govind das; 
edited by Kaviraj Ambikadatt Shastri; 
Chaukhambha Surabharati, 2008, p. 418.4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 2, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:97.
5. Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, Siddhayoga 
Sangraha, 8th edition, Sri Baidyanath 
Ayurved Bhavan Ltd. Nagpur, 1984,  
Pg. no. 86.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:256.REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION
 Apasmara  is convulsive disorder characterised 
by transient loss of memory. 
Case Definition:
Apasmara is diagnosed on the basis of 
episodes of transient loss of memory and 
consciousness usually associated with 
seizures, preceded with aura.
Differential Diagnosis:
Following conditions are to be ruled out as 
most of these present with convulsions.
• Akshepaka
• Sannipatajwara
• Darvikaradamsha
Line of Treatment
• Nidaana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.• Shodhana Chikitsa – Vamana, 
Virechana, Basti, Nasya, 
Raktamokshana
• Shamana Chikitsa  – Dipana, Pachana, 
Snehana, Swedana, Dhara, Brimhana
• External applications  – Shirolepa  
and Pichu
• Medhya Rasayana 
• Treatment according to Doshik 
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Vata  Vyadhi  and Manasaroga
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations: Nothing Specific
Treatment:  Some of the following drugs may 
be advised APASMARA  (EPILEPSY)
Table 19.1: Medicines at level 1 for Apasmara
Drug Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Mansyadi
Kwatha1Kwatha 30-40 ml Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one month-
Vacha Churna2Churna 1-2 gm Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWith 
Honey
Brahmi Ghrita3Ghrita 10-20 gm Before meal twice 
a day15 days to 
one monthWarm
Water
128 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES APASMARA (EPILEPSY)
Kalyanaka Ghrita4Ghrita 10-15 ml Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWarm 
Water
Shatavari Churna5Churna 5 gm Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthMilk
Lashuna Kalka6Kalka 3 gm After meal twice 
a day15 days to 
one monthTila Taila
Saraswata
Arishta7Arishta 10-20 ml After meal twice 
a day15 days to 
one monthEqual 
quantity 
of Water
of natural urges, adventurous 
activities, deep water, standing on 
edges at heights, fireplaces 
Referral Criteria: Cases that are not 
responding to above management, Refer to 
level 2
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: The diagnosis is made on 
the basis of criteria mentioned in level-1 for 
fresh cases. 
Investigations: Nothing specific
Treatment: Treatment given in level-1 
may be continued along with some of the  
following.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):- 
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Wheat ( Godhuma ), Black 
gram ( Masha ), Seasoned rice ( Purana 
Shali ), Green gram, milk and Ghee, 
Kooshmanda 
• Vihara : Yoga and meditation and 
proper sleep
Don’ts -
• Ahara : Food which aggravate Vata  
like excessive use of Kalaya , potato, 
chilli. Paryushita  Ahara (stale food), 
Viruddha Ahara (incompatible diet), 
Alcohol
• Vihara : Physical and mental stress, 
inadequate sleep, suppression 
Table 19.2: Medicines at level 2 for Apasmara  
Common 
medicationDosage form Dose Time Duration Anupana
Saraswata Churna8Churna 3-5 gm After meal / 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthHoney
Smrutisagar Rasa9Vati 1-2 Vati
(125-250 mg)Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthGhrita
 APASMARA (EPILEPSY)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 129Jatamansya Arka10Arka 10 ml After meals 
twice a day15 days to 
one month Water
Manasmitra Vati11Vati 1-2 Vati 
(each 500 mg)Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWarm water
Mahakalyanaka 
Ghrita12Ghrita 10-20 ml Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWarm water
Panchagavya 
Ghrita13Ghrita 10-20 ml Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWarm water
4-8 ml Empty stomach 
once a day7 days Nasya Karma
Kooshmandaswrasa 
GhritaGhrita 10-20 ml Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to 
one monthWarm water
Panchagandha 
ChurnaChurna 
as Pichu, 
Shirolepa5 gm - Buttermilk / 
milk
Treatment: In addition to the treatment 
prescribed in level-1 and 2, following 
procedures can be done.
1. Vamana Karma 
2. Virechana Karma
3. Yapana Basti
4. Nasya
5. Rasayana Therapy  
a. Brahmi
b. Aswagandha
c. Vacha
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1
Referral Criteria: The cases those are not 
responding to above mentioned therapy 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigations:
1. EEG
2. CT / MRI Scan 
130 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES APASMARA (EPILEPSY)
Table 19.3: Medicines at level 3 for Apasmara
Formulation Dosage form Dose Time Duration Anupana
Brahma Rasayana14Leha 10 gm Before meal; 
twice a day15 days to one 
monthMilk
Survana Vasant 
Malati RasaVati 1-2 Vati /
(each 125 mg)After meals 
twice a day15 days to one 
monthWater
Suvarna Brahmi Vati Vati 100 mg Empty stomach 
twice a day15 days to one 
monthBrahmi 
Swarasa
REFERENCES
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 130.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 293.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 28.
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 68.
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 94.
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 90.
14. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003: Volume 1, 
pg. 43.1. Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, Siddhayoga 
Sangraha, 8th edition, Sri Baidyanath 
Ayurved Bhavan Ltd. Nagpur, 1984,  
pg. 86.
2. Vaidya Ravidatta Shastri, Chakradatta, 
Choukambha Surabharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, 21/11, pg. 90.
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 94.
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 82.
5. Vaidya Ravidatta Shastri, Chakradatta, 
Chaukambha Surabharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, 21/13, pg. 90.
6. Vaidya Ravidatta Shastri, Chakradatta, 
Chaukambha Surabharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, 21/13, pg. 90.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003, pg. 99.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
INTRODUCTION
Vishaada  is one of the Vatananatmaja Vikaras1 
and is an important aggravating factor for 
most of diseases.2 It is a condition originating 
from apprehension of failure leading to lack 
of initiation for any activity.3 The above 
presentation is comparable with anxiety  
with depression.
Case Definition
The diagnosis will be made on the basis of 
sign and symptoms of Vishaada  like; 
A) Psychic Symptoms: Dukhita  (distressed, 
unhappy, grieved in mind), Avasada  
(hopelessness, lassitude), Manahkheda  
(feeling of depression), Vishanna  
(dejection, sorrow), Chittaglani (fatigue 
of mind), Asiddhi Bhaya  (fear and 
anxiety or apprehension of failure), 
Dainya  (miserable state / depression) 
Chittodvega (anxiety), Feeling of 
inadequacy, thought of death/suicide. 
B) Somatic Symptoms: Sidanti Gatrani 
(fatigue), Mukha Shosha  (Dryness of 
mouth), Prasveda (excessive sweating), 
Bhramati Manas  (wandering mind), 
Tvakparidaha  (burning sensation of 
skin), Vepathu  (tremor) Roma Harsha 
(horripilation), Sransanam  (inability to 
hold).Differential diagnosis:
• Kaphaja Unmada
• Anidra
Line of management: 
Sattvavajaya Chikitsa - Ashwashana, 
Harshana  etc. along with imparting Jnana  
(personal awareness), Vijnana  (proved 
sciences), Dhairya  (assurance), Smriti  
(experience sharing), Samadhi  (helping to 
divert the mind from causative factors and 
establishing self control)
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis:  On the basis of history  
and clinical findings, patient can be diag -
nosed as case of Vishaada.
Investigations : It can be diagnosed based on 
the clinical signs and symptoms, systemic 
examination may be done to review the 
status of the patient.
Treatment : In the initial stage along with 
Satvavajaya (counseling), patient should 
be given combination of two or more of 
following drugs depending upon the status 
of depression.VISHAADA (DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS)
132 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESVISHAADA (DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS)
Table 20.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vishada
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Vacha4Churna 1-2 gm Before meal/ 
twice daily4-8 weeks Honey
Brahmi 5Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks Ghee
Ashwagandha Churna 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
thrice daily4-8 weeks Ghee
Shankhapushpi Churna 3-6 gm Before meals / 
thrice daily4-8 weeks Ghee 
Kushmanda Swarasa 50 ml Early morning 
empty stomach1 month
Jyothismati Taila Taila 2-4 drops Early morning 
empty stomach4-8 weeks Milk / Batasha
Mansyadi Kwatha6Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Water 
Saraswatarishta7Arishta 10-20 ml After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
especially of hunger, bowel and 
urine and emotions.
Referral criteria: 
• Patient not responding to above 
mentioned management
• Need further investigations
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis:  Same as Level 1: for a 
fresh case reporting directly. 
Investigation: 
• Complete hemogramPathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style):
Do’s –
• Ahara : Fresh and Satvika  food. 
Godhuma , Mudga, Raktashali, 
Godugdha, Ghrita, Kushmanda, 
Parval, Vastuka, coconut , Draksha, 
Kapittha .
• Vihara : Proper sleep, meditation, 
techniques for self control, personal 
hygiene
Dont’s–
• Ahara : Liquor, Viruddhashan , spicy 
food, stale food, night awaking, 
• Vihara : Excessive stress, 
suppression of natural urge 
VISHAADA (DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 133Treatment: Same as level 1:  in addition the following drugs may be added
Table 20.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vishaada
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Saraswatarishta8
(With gold)Arishta 10-20 ml After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Equal quantity 
of water
Unmadagaja
Keshari Rasa9Vati 1-2 Vati  
(250-500 mg)After meal 2-3 weeks Ghee
Kalyana Ghrita Ghrita 10-30 ml Early morning 
empty stomach1 month Warm milk
Panchagavya Ghrita Ghrita 10-30 ml Early morning 
empty stomach1 month Warm milk
Brahmi Ghrita Ghrita 10-30 ml Early morning 
empty stomach1 month Warm milk
Drakshadi Kashaya Decoction 60 ml Before food / 
twice daily1 month
Kushmanda Avaleha Avaleha 10-20 gm Early morning 
empty stomach1 month Warm milk
Investigation: nothing specific
Treatment:  In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level 2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures indicated can be performed.
Shodhana :
Nasya : Tikshna  with Hingu Ghrita, 
Panchagavya Ghrita11
Vamana : Vamana Karma with Dhamargava  
after Snehapana  with Panchagavya Ghrita.12
Virechana : Virechana Karma  with Trivrita 
Lehya 30 gm  along with Avipatikara powder
Yapana Basti 
Rasayana : 
1. Shilajatu Rasayana Kalpa
2. Amalaki Rasayana KalpaIn addition to it, 
Mridu Virechana : As per the status of the 
patient, Mridu Virechana / Koshtha Shuddhi  
with Avipatikara Churna10 5-10 gm with water 
3-5 days before treatment. Similarly patient 
may be kept on fasting for early few days.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
Referral criteria : Cases not to be responded to 
above therapy and needs further evaluation 
for management.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA HOSPITALS 
AT INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL 
OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
134 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESVISHAADA (DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS)
3. Brahmi Ghrita13
4. Panchagavya Ghrita14
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:97
9 Kaviraj Govindadas Sen, Bhaishajya 
Ratnavali, Siddhiprada hindi vyakhyasahita, 
edited by Prof. Siddhinandan Mishra, 
chapt. 24/ 35-37, Reprint, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi, 2011:504
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:15), 2000
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:268
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:268
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:279
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:268Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Acharya Jadavaji Trikamji, Charaka  
Samhita, Chakrapanidatta, Reprint 
edi. Ayurveda Dipika commentary, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan: 2007. p.113 
2 Sharma RK, Das B. Charaka Samhita, 
Chakrapanidatta. Reprint edi. Ayurveda 
Dipika commentary, Varanasi: 
Chaukhambha Orientalia; 2009. p.416.
3 Acharya YT. Sushruta Samhita, 
Dalhanacharya. Reprint edi. Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary, Varanasi: 
Chaukhamba Krishnadas Academy;  
2004. p.6.
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 2 (74)
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part 1  
Vol. 2 (11)
6 Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya, Siddhayoga 
Sangraha, 8th ed. Shri Baidyanatha Ayurveda 
Bhawan ltd. Nagapur, 1984:86
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:97
Mootravaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Formation of Ashma (stone) like substances 
within the urinary system is called Ashmari . It 
can be considered as a Madhyama Rogamargaja 
Vyadhi  as its Sthana is “Basti”  – one among the 
Trimarma.  The Asraya Sthana  itself makes the 
disease Krichrasaadhya.  Its treatment consists 
of both Bheshaja  & Shastra Karma. 
Case Definition: 
Pain during micturition, pain in the abdomen 
or loin region radiating towards supra pubic 
region, burning sensation, presence of blood 
in urine occasionally, aggravation of pain 
during activities like running, swimming, 
jumping, riding, jerky movement etc. 
suggests Ashmari (urinary calculus). 
Various Presentations: According to the 
predominance of particular Dosha , following 
presentations of the disease may be found.
1. Vaataja Ashmari : Due to severe pain, 
patient cries out in agony, squeezes the 
umbilical region, rubs the penis and 
touches the perineum.
2. Pittaja Ashmari:  Burning sensation and 
inflammatory changes in urinary tract.
3. Shleshmaja Ashmari:  Dysuria, cutting, 
incising, pricking pain, heaviness and 
cold sensation over the area of bladder.
4. Shukraja Ashmari : Occurs in adult only. 
Any injury to urinary tract during sexual 
act or by any other reason, suppression of ejaculation leads to accumulation of 
Shukra (semen) in the tract. Vayu gives 
rise to seminal concretion called Shukraja 
Ashmari . It obstructs the pathway of 
urine thus causing dysuria, scrotal 
swelling and lower abdominal pain. Its 
special characteristic feature is that it 
can easily be dissolved by applying mild 
pressure by hands over it. 
Differential diagnosis of Renal 
Calculus:
1. Horse shoe kidney: Congenital anomaly 
and usually asymptomatic.
2. Polycystic kidney: Most common in 
female with symptoms like loin pain, 
haematuria, hypertension, uremia.
3. Hydronephrosis: Dull ache in loin with 
backache, due to obstructive uropathy. 
4. Pyelonephritis (Acute/chronic): Asso -
ciated with headache, lassitude, febrile, 
nausea, vomiting and pain at renal  
angle.
5. Renal Tuberculosis: Painless haematuria 
in initial stages, common in 20-40 years 
of age group. 
6. Tuberculous cystitis : Painful maturation
7. Renal neoplasms 
Differential diagnosis of ureteric 
calculus:
1. Acute Appendicitis: Acute colicky pain 
in right iliac fossa may be associated 
with anorexia, fever and vomiting.ASHMARI  (URINARY CALCULUS)
138 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESASHMARI (URINARY CALCULUS)
2. Acute salpingitis: Acute colicky pain in 
left or/and right iliac fossa.
Differential diagnosis of urinary 
bladder calculus: 
1. Bladder exstrophy: It is congenital 
anomaly.
2. Rupture of bladder: It is emergency 
condition due to accidental rupture of 
bladder.
3. Diverticulum of bladder: The victim is 
male above age of 50 years. It is due to 
bladder neck obstruction and the symp -
tom is haematuria and signs of cystitis.
4. Cystitis: Middle and young females 
are main victim of this condition. 
The common symptom is increased 
frequency of maturation.5. Tumors of bladder: Benign Papillary 
tumours and carcinoma of bladder
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of 
history and clinical presentation patient 
can be diagnosed provisionally as case of  
Ashmari .
Investigations:  On the basis of clinical 
examination and cardinal signs & symptoms, 
provisional diagnosis can be made. 
Treatment:  In the initial stage, when the 
patient is having mild features of Ashmari 
(renal calculus), along with diet education, 
two or more of following drugs may  
be given:
Table 21.1: Medicines at level 1 for Ashmari
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Gokshura Churna Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Punarnava Churna Churna 2-3 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Guduchi Churna Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Parnabeeja
ChurnaChurna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Pashanbheda Churna Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Rasayana Churna Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
Gokshuradi Guggulu1Vati 1-2 Vati After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks With water
ASHMARI (URINARY CALCULUS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 139Ashmarihara Kwatha2Kwatha 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks -
Punaravashtaka Kwatha3Kwatha 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks -
Varuna Shigru Kwatha Kwatha 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks -
Trinapanchamula 
Kwatha4Kwatha 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 weeks -
Chandraprabha Vati5Vati 1-2 Tab After meal / twice or 
thrice a day2-3 weeks Warm water
substances heavy to digest, excess 
amount of milk products , Rhubarb, 
strawberries, plums, spinach, 
asparagus, Kapittha Phala, Jambu 
Phala , dried dates, astringent foods 
articles, brinjal, beans, lady finger, 
capsicum, tomato, cucumber, 
spinach, black grapes, kiwi, 
strawberries, chickoo, pear, refined 
wheat flour (Maida), papaya, garlic, 
yogurt, cashew nut, dried food 
items.
• Vihara: Excessive exercise/ physical 
work, over eating, healthy foods 
mixed with unhealthy, suppression 
of natural urges
Referral criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above 
conservative therapy.
2. Development of complications 
3. Haematuria
4. Need for further investigations.For the complains like pain, Vedana Shamaka 
drugs  like Triphala Guggulu , Sarjika Kshara  or 
Ajamodadi Churna  etc. can be given.
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): 
Do’s - 
• Ahara (food articles): Intake of 
excess fluid, dietary items having 
Vataanulomana  and Mutrala 
properties like  Yava ( barley ), 
Kulattha ( Horse gram ), Purana Shali 
(old rice) , Mudga  (green gram), 
puffed rice, Rajma , vegetables 
like carrot, bitter guard, potatoes, 
reddish, pumpkin, fruits like 
banana, lemons, apricot, plums, 
apple, almonds, coconut water, 
lemon juice, Aloe vera  juice, corn 
silk, pineapple juice, butter milk, 
spices like ginger etc. can be used. 
• Vihara : Sitz bath 
Don’ts - 
• Ahara (food articles):  Cold food 
and drinks, fatty foods, food 
140 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESASHMARI (URINARY CALCULUS)
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: The diagnosis is made 
on the basis of criteria mentioned in level-1 
for fresh cases. The case referred from level-1 
or fresh case must be evaluated according 
to the Doshic  involvement. The obstruction 
in the urinary system and stage of infection 
should be ruled out. The clinical examination 
should be done thoroughly for detecting 
complications.
Investigations:  In this level-2 Laboratory and 
radiological investigations should be done to 
confirm the diagnosis.Laboratory investigation: 
• Complete Haemogram, 
• Serum uric acid, 
• Serum calcium.
• Renal function test.
• Urine analysis, culture.
• X-Ray KUB (Kidney, Ureter, 
Bladder) 
Treatment: The prime aim at this level is 
to confirm the diagnosis and assess the 
prognosis.
Mild to moderate symptoms: The line of 
management is same as level-1 for fresh case. 
Patient must be evaluated for conditions 
where surgical or any other special procedure 
is required. 
Table 21.2: Medicines at level 2 for Ashmari
Drugs Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shuddha Shilajatu Churna 0.5-1.0 gm After meal /
twice a day2-3 weeks Milk
Gokshuradi Kashaya6 Kwatha 12-24 ml After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Pashanabhedadi 
Churna7Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Usheeradi Churna8Churna 3-6 gm After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Chandraprabha Vati9Vati 1-2 Vati After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Palasha Kshaara Churna 250-500 mg After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Varunadi Ghrita10Ghrita 5-10 gm After meal /
thrice daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
ASHMARI (URINARY CALCULUS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 141Ushirasava11Asava 10-20 ml After meal /
twice a day2-3 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
Chandanasava12Asava 10-20 ml After meal /
twice a day2-3 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
Sarivadyasava13 Asava 10-20 ml After meal /
twice a day2-3 weeks Equal quantity of 
water
2. IVP / IVU 
3. Cystography 
4. Cystoscopy 
5. Ureteroscopy
6. Percutaneous Nephroscopy 
7. Renal Angiography
8. CT Scan 
9. MRI
Treatment:  In addition to the treatment 
prescribed in level-1 and 2 following specific 
treatment can be given.
Specific treatment as per the dominant 
Dosha :
1. In Vataja Ashmari, Ghrita  prepared from 
Pashanabheda, Vasuka (Swetaarka), Vasira 
(Rakta Apamarga) Ashmantaka, Shatavari, 
Gokshura, Bŗihati, Kantakari, Brahmi, 
Sahachar, Ushira, Kubjaka, Vrikshadini, 
Shyonaka, Varuņa , fruits of  Shaka, barley , 
Kulattha, Kola and Kataka  should be 
given.
2. In  Pittaja Ashmari, Ghrita prepared  
from  Kusha, Kasha, Shara, Gundra, Itkata, 
Morata, Pashanabheda, Shatavari, Vidari, 
Shalimula, Trikantaka, Bhalluka, Patola, Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level – 1
Referral Criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above 
mentioned therapy
2. If the size of stone, pain and severity of 
symptoms are increasing 
3. Complications like hydronephrosis or 
pylonephrosis are observed 
4. Patients with some other uncontrolled 
conditions like diabetes mellitus and 
hypertension etc. 
5. The raised values of blood urea and 
serum creatinine.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Patient not responding 
to the conservative treatment mentioned in 
level-1 and 2 should further be evaluated for 
special investigation and treatment.
Investigations:
1. USG - KUB
142 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESASHMARI (URINARY CALCULUS)
Patha, Pattura, Kuruntika, Punarnava and 
Shirisha  should be given.
3. In Kaphaja Ashmari, Ghrita  prepared 
from Varunadi Gana, Guggulu, cardamom, 
Harenu, Kushtha, drugs of  Bhadradi gana , 
Maricha, Chitraka and Devadaru  should 
be given.
4. In Sharkara  (urinary gravels), Pichuka, 
Akol, Nirmali, Shaka, Nilkamal should be 
given with jaggary and water. Gokshur, 
Musali, Ajavayan, Kadamb, Sunthi should 
be given with warm water.In addition to the treatment prescribed in 
level-1 and 2, following procedures can be 
done
1. Virechana Karma
2. Basti
3. Uttara Basti
If patient is not responding to these treatment 
modalities, he/she may be referred to modern 
surgical hospital for surgical removal or 
lithotripsy treatment of calculus. 
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level - 1
REFERENCES
1. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (5 : 3).
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-II (4 : 3).
3. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I ( 4:22).
4. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART - II (4:8).
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (12:10).
6. Yogaratnakara, Vidyotini Hindi Com -
mentary by Vaidya Lakshmipati Shastri; 
Chaukhambha Prakashan Varanasi Edition 
2008, Vata Rogadhikara, 26/71, pg. 524.
7. Yogaratnakara, Vidyotini Hindi Com -
mentary by Vaidya Lakshmipati Shastri; 
Chaukhambha Prakashan Varanasi Edi -tion 2008, Ashmari Chikitsa, 50/36-37,  
pg. 213.
8. Bhaishjya Ratnavali, edited by Indradev 
Tripathi and Dr. Daya Shankar Tripathi, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Varanasi, Edition 
2013, Raktapittadhikar, 13/40-41, pg. 392.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (12:10).
10. Yogaratnakara, Vidyotini Hindi Com -
mentary by Vaidya Lakshmipati Shastri; 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Varanasi Edi -
tion 2008, Ashmarirogadhikara, 50/45-48, 
pg.520-521.
11. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (1:8).
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (1:15).
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, PART-I (1:37)
INTRODUCTION
Mutraghata stand for low urine output 
due to obstruction in the passage of urine. 
The disorders of Mutravaha Srotasa , which 
have resemblance with the description of 
urological disorders on modern parlance, 
are well described in Ayurvedic literature. 
Mutraghata can be classified into three 
categories as projected below, then we may 
be in a position to understand the varieties 
of Mutraghata more clearly and it would be 
more helpful to analyse a patient presenting 
with related complaints.
• Vatakundalika , Vatabasti and 
Mutrajathara can be grouped under 
Neurogenic disturbances in the 
bladder functioning.
• Vatastheela , Mutragranthi , 
Mutrotsanga and Bastikundalika 
can be grouped under organic 
disturbances, where the symptoms 
of retention of urine, increased 
frequency of micturition, distension 
of abdomen and mass felt per 
rectum etc. may be present due 
to a growth either in the bladder, 
urethra, prostate or other related 
structures.
• Mutratita , Mutrakshaya , Ushnavata , 
Mutraukasada , Vidavighata and 
Mutrashukra can be grouped under 
category “others”, where the 
disturbance in urinary function is either due to physiologic reasons 
or injury etc., but not due to 
obstruction.
Case Definition:
The main characteristic symptoms are 
oliguria-anuria with edema (facial/
generalized); the condition may be associated 
with nausea and/or vomiting, loss of appetite, 
muscle cramps, vertigo/dizziness with or 
without headache, hiccough, breathlessness, 
weakness/malaise and anaemia.
Differential diagnosis:
• Pre-renal: Poor cardiac function, 
Chronic liver insufficiency, 
Narrowing of renal arteries
• Renal:  Diabetic nephropathy, 
Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis, 
Chronic glomerular diseases, 
Chronic Interstitial Nephritis, 
Polycystic Kidney Disease, 
Hereditary renal diseases
Post-renal:  PUJ obstruction, Urinary calculus, 
BPH, Obstructive uropathy.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation as described above, 
a patient can be diagnosed provisionally as 
case of chronic renal failure.MUTRAGHATA  (CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE)
144 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUTRAGHATA (CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE)
Investigations: 
a. Raised Serum Creatinine level above 
normal range
b. Raised Blood Urea level above normal 
range
Table 22.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mutraghata
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Gokshura Churna1Powder 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Punarnava Churna2Powder 2-3 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Guduchi Churna3Powder 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Shatavari Churna4Powder 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Rasayana Churna5Powder 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Bhumyamalaki Churna Powder 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Gokushuradi Guggulu6Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Punaravashtaka Kwataha7Decoction 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Varunadi Kwatha8Decoction 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Shigru Kwatha9Decoction 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Shilajityadi Vati10Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/
thrice daily2-3 weeks with water
Trinapanchamula Kwatha11Decoction 20-40 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -c. Low Hemoglobin percentage than 
normal
Treatment : In the initial stage when the pa -
tient is having mild features of chronic renal 
failure , along with dietary corrections, two 
or more of the following drugs may be given:
MUTRAGHATA (CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 145In addition to these, patients may be advised 
to maintain input-output chart for fluid 
regulation. 
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s–
• Ahara : Food items prepared mainly 
from rice or rice flour, Moong Daal , 
fresh and easy to digest cooked 
vegetables with less/no salt, apple, 
grapes, dates (except in diabetic 
nephropathy) and papaya, and 
perched rice are good. Rock salt 
in limited amount is preferred. 
Patients can take one or two 
Chapatti  made of barley flour in a 
day. Sesame oil and cow ghee are to 
be used in small quantity but other 
cooking fats are to be avoided. 
• Vihara : Timely meals, restricted 
intake of water, proper following of 
daily regimen
Don’ts–
• Ahara : All other flour items (i.e. 
wheat, millet, corn), bakery items, 
all oils except sesame, junk food, 
fermented items, salts, all the items 
having sour taste, chilies, deep fried 
items, milk products and vegetables 
with slimy properties (brinjal, ladies 
finger etc.), non-vegetarian foods
• Vihara : Excessive physical and men -
tal stress, day sleep and night vigil.
Referral criteria:  Refer to level 2
1. Patients not responding to above 
mentioned management 2. Patients having persistent raised Blood 
Urea and serum creatinine levels with or 
without oedema 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES:
Here, patient may be directly referred to 
level 3 care, as the role of level 2 and 3 care 
are almost same 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS 
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation: In addition to level 1 
investigation, the following are to be added:
• Blood for S. electrolytes: Altered 
or normal serum electrolytes and 
calcium 
• Blood for S. Uric Acid: Serum 
uric acid may rise as a secondary 
hyperuricemia. 
• Blood Sugar: Blood sugar level 
should be checked for the patients 
of diabetic nephropathy, often there 
is reduction in blood sugar levels 
in diabetics as they develop renal 
insufficiency. 
• Urine: Albuminuria is commonly 
seen in all cases 
146 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUTRAGHATA (CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE)
• Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR): 
less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2  and 
persistent (present for > 3 months) 
with or without any symptoms  
and signs. 
• Ultrasound investigation : Ul -
trasonography (USG) of Kidney, 
Ureter and Bladder with signs of 
altered or loss of cortico-medullary differentiation with raised cortical 
echo-texture of the kidney. The 
size of the kidneys mostly becomes 
smaller.
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient:
Table 22.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mutraghata
Drug Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shuddha Shilajatu12Powder 2-3 gm After meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks with milk
Vastyamayantaka Ghrita13Liquid 5 – 10 ml Twice a day on 
empty stomach 2 – 3 weeks With warm 
milk 
1. Shodhana :
1. Nādīsvedana  in both the loin region 
once in the morning
2. Niruhabasti  every day before lunch 
time. (Formation of Niruhabasti  – 
Madhu  30 ml + Saindhava Lavana  5 
g + Tila Taila  30 ml + Kalka Dravya  
(Shatapushpa , Madanaphala, Pippali , 
Vacha  in equal quantity) in Chur ]na 
form 15 gm + Punarnavadi Kwatha14 
– 240 ml according to classical 
method. Basti must be retained not 
less than 20 minutes.
3. Uttarabasti: Dashamoola Taila , 
particularly in cases of obstructive 
uropathy.
2. Rasayana : List of Rasayana Drugs which 
may be used for either for prevention or 
management of the disease1. Rasayana Churna (equal quantity 
of Guduchi, Gok ]sura and Amalaki 
Churna ) 3 gm thrice a day with water.
2. Bhumyamalaki Churna 3 gm thrice a 
day with water.
Special cautions: 
• If the patient is already on mainte -
nance dialysis, it is to be continued. 
The frequency of dialysis is to be re -
duced according to improvement in 
the patient’s general condition and 
renal function.
• Patient not responding with above 
mentioned regimen are to be 
refereed to higher centers having 
facility of dialysis. 
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
MUTRAGHATA (CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1471 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/20 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
2 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/36 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
3 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Vatarakta Rogadhikara, Adhyaya 27/10 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
4 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khanda 6/155; Pt. Parashuram 
Shastri Vidyasagar. 1st ed, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi.
5 Astanga Hridaya Rasayana: Comm. By 
Sarvangasundara by Arunadatta and 
Ayurveda Rasayana of Hemadri annotated 
by Dr. Anna Moreswar Kunte and Krishna 
Ramachandra Sastri Avre, edited by 
Pt. HariSadashiva Sastri Paradakara, 
Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 
Varanasi.
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part  I (I 5 : 3)
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part  I ( 4:22)8 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/18-20 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
9 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/7 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
10 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Mutraghata Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 35/15 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part  II (4:8)
12 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Mutraghata Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 35/15 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6 : 40)
14 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/43-44 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION
The disorders of Mutravaha Srotasa  have 
resemblance with the description of 
urological disorders on modern parlance. 
The vitiated Vata gets lodged between 
the bladder and rectum, produces stony 
hard swelling i.e. enlargement of prostatic  
tissue.
Case Definition:
Single, movable and elevated cystic portion 
which resembles with prostate gland, which is hard to firm in consistency associated 
with retention of urine, feces and flatus, 
poor urine flow which does not improve 
rather worsen by straining, dribbling, 
hesitancy, intermittent stream -stops and 
starts, feeling of incomplete evacuation of 
urine and episodes of frequent retention of 
urine, distension of the urinary bladder and 
excruciating pain in the urinary bladder 
suggest Mutrashthila  (BPH).
Differential Diagnosis: The differential 
diagnosis of BPH with Carcinoma of  
ProstateMUTRASHT ILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC 
HYPERPLASIA)
Table 23.1: Differential diagnosis of Mutrashtila with their clinical features
Symptoms BPH Carcinoma of Prostate
Size Small to big Usually not very big
Consistency Firm and elastic Hard
Surface Smooth surface 
The gap between the enlarged
prostate and the lateral pelvic
wall is clearIrregular and nodular surface.
The gap is obliterated by
invasion of the cancer
Sulcus Midline sulcus between two lateral 
lobes is well defined.Sulcus is usually obliterated
Seminal
VesicleFelt normal This may be invaded by the tumor 
and felt hard and irregular
Rectal mucosa The rectal mucosa moves
freely over the enlarged
prostateThe rectal mucosa is adherent
and cannot be moved over enlarged 
prostate
MUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 149
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of BPH.
Thus, on the basis of clinical symptoms and 
per rectal finding of enlarged prostate gland 
with soft, rubbery consistency, free mucosa 
and painless growth, further confirms the 
diagnosed of BPH.Investigations:  As it is level-1, facilities of 
investigation may be lacking, so the diagnosis 
is purely on the basis of clinical examination 
and symptoms, fairly good provisional 
diagnosis can be made.
Treatment : In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of BPH , along 
with diet education, two or more of following 
drugs may be given:
Table 23.2: Medicines at level 1 for Mutrashtila
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Gokshura Churna1Churna 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Punarnava Churna2Churna 2-3 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Guduchi Churna3Churna 3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Dhanyaka Hima4Cold infusion - 
liquid 10-20 ml After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Rasayana Churna5Churna  3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Bhumyamalaki 
ChurnaChurna  3-6 gm After meal/ 
thrice daily2-3 weeks Water
Gokushuradi 
Guggulu6Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Kanchanara Guggulu7Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Punaravashtaka 
Kwatha8Decoction 20-40 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Varuna Kwatha9Decoction 20-40 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
150 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
For the complaints like pain, Vedanashamaka 
drugs like Triphala Guggulu , Sarjikakshara  or 
Ajamodadi Churna etc. can be given.
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education):
Do’s–
• Ahara : Intake of excess fluid and 
dietetic items having Vata Anulomana  
and Mutrala properties like  Purana 
Shali (year old rice) , Mudga (green 
gram) , Yava  (barley), Puffed rice, 
Kulattha  (horse gram), Rajma  and 
vegetables like carrots, bitter guard, 
potatoes, radish, pumpkin, fruits 
like banana, lemons, apricot, plums, 
apple, almonds, coconut water, 
lemon juice, aloe vera juice, corn 
silk, pineapple juice, butter milk 
and spices like ginger can be used. 
• Vihara:  Timely meals, proper 
following of daily regimen
Don’ts–
• Ahara : Healthy foods mixed 
with unhealthy, Cold food and 
drinks, Fatty foods, Food sub -
stances heavy to digest, Excess 
sweet diet, Dried food items,  
Kapittha Phala, Jambu Phala , dried 
dates, Consumption of astringent 
foods articles, brinjal, Beans, lady 
finger, capsicum, tomato, cucum -
ber, spinach, black grapes, kiwi, 
strawberries, chickoo, pear, refined 
wheat flour ( Maida ), papaya, garlic, 
yoghurt, cashew nut etc. • Vihara : Excessive exercise / physical 
work, over eating, suppression of 
natural urges. 
Referral criteria : Refer to level 2
1. Cases not responding to above conserv -
ative therapy.
2. Increased frequency of micturition and 
dribbling which hamper the quality of 
life.
3. Severe burning micturition with 
unbearable pain.
4. The complications like acute retention  
of urine. 
5. Suspected case of carcinoma of prostate 
gland
6. Patients who are in need of radiological 
investigations to rule out the enlargement 
of prostate or to differentiate from 
malignancy. 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: The diagnosis is made 
same as mentioned in level-1 for fresh case 
reporting directly. If a patient presents with 
more severe symptoms, then the stage of 
disease or malignancy should be find out as 
mentioned in the table-1.
Investigations: Laboratory and radiological 
investigations may be done to confirm 
diagnosis.
1. Ultrasonography (USG) of KUB 
2. Blood Examination: Complete hemo -
gram, Blood urea, S. creatinine, PSA. 
3. Urine Examination.
MUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 151Treatment:
Mild to moderate symptoms: The treatment 
is similar as level-1 for fresh cases reporting 
directly, like Pathya Apathya,  single and com -pound drug. If symptoms are getting aggra -
vated and patient is having acute retention 
of urine then simple rubber catheterization 
should be done for temporary relief under 
aseptic precautions.
Table 23.3: Medicines at level 2 for Mutrashtila
Drug Dosage 
formDosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shuddha Shilajatu10Churna  500 mg –  
1 gmafter meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Milk
Gokshuradi 
Kashaya11Decoction 12-24 ml After meal / 
thrice daily2-3 weeks -
Chandraprabha 
Vati12Vati 1-2 Vati After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Palasha Kshara Churna  250-500 mg After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Varunadi Ghrita13Ghee 5-10 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Ushirasava14Asava 10-20 ml after meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Mixed with equal 
quantity of water
Chandanasava15Asava 10-20 ml after meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Mixed with equal 
quantity of water
Sarivadyasava16Asava 10-20 ml after meal/twice 
daily2-3 weeks Mixed with equal 
quantity of water
Hingavadi Churna17Churna 3-6 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Mustaka Churna18Churna 3-6 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Water
Gokshuradi Ghrita Ghee 5-10 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Pashanabhedadi 
Ghrita19Ghee 5-10 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Sthiradi Ghrita20Ghee 5-10 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
Changeri Ghrita21Ghee 5-10 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 weeks Luke warm water
152 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
Manjishtadi Kwatha, Kamalanaala Kshara and 
Kadali Kanda Kshara may be given to patients 
of BPH.
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style educa -
tion): Same as level-1
Referral criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above 
mentioned therapy.
2. If the size of prostate gland is on 
increasing 
3. The cases of severe pain in supra-pubic 
region due to cystitis.
4. Recurrent episodes of retention of urine.
5. Complications like hydronephrosis 
or pylonephrosis and signs of renal 
failure are observed due to obstructive 
uropathy. 
6. Incontinence of urine
7. Recurrent urinary infection.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Patients not responding 
to the conservative treatment mentioned in 
level-1 and level-2 and having the clinical 
conditions like recurrent episodes of urinary 
retention recurrent UTI, haematuria and 
symptoms of renal failure should further 
be evaluated for special investigation and 
treatment.Investigations:
1. Biochemical investigations like Serum 
acid phosphatase, Serum alkaline 
phosphatase and Serum testosterone 
2. Trans Rectal Ultra Sonography (TRUS) 
3. Cystoscopy 
4. Uroflowmetry
5. Biopsy of prostate gland
6. CT-Scan
Treatment:  Same as level-1 and 2
If the patient comes with acute retention of 
urine and urethral catheterization fails then 
supra-pubic cystostomy should be carried 
out immediately.
Shodhana :
Uttar Basti  is mentioned in the classic for the 
management of all types of Mutraghata,  but if 
done without proper aseptic precautions, it 
may practically lead to infections via urethra. 
Matrabasti  is much beneficial. The action of 
drug through urethral route or rectal route 
is nearly similar, so rectal route is preferable. 
The Matrabasti  is also beneficial in cases of 
BPH to control the further progress of prostate 
gland without any aseptic precautions as 
needed in Uttarbasti .
Kamalanaala Kshara, Kadali Kanda Kshara are 
also beneficial.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level-1
MUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1531 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/20 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
2 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udara Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 40/36 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
3 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Vatarakta Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 27/10 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993
4 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khand 4/7; Pt. Parashuram 
Shastri Vidyasagar. 1st ed, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi 2006
5 Astanga Hridaya Rasayana: Comm. By 
Sarvangasundara by Arunadatta and 
Ayurveda Rasayana of Hemadri annotated 
by Dr, Anna Moreswar Kunte and Krishna 
Ramachandra Sastri Avre, edited by Pt. Hari 
Sadashiva Sastri Paradakara, Chaukhambha 
Surabharati Prakashan, Varanasi.
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  ( 5 : 3)
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  ( 5 : 1)
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  ( 4:22)9 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/18-20 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
10 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Mootraghata Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 35/15 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
11 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita 
Madhyama Khand 2/109; Pt. Parashuram 
Shastri Vidyasagar. 1st ed, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi 2006
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (12 : 10)
13 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/53 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (1 :8)
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (1 : 15)
16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (1 : 37)
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (7 : 38)REFERENCES
154 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUTRASHTILA (BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA)
18 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Shoola Rogadhikara, Adhyaya 30/40 edited 
by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993
19 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Ashmari Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 36/57-60 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.20 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Udavartanaha Rogadhikar, Adhyaya 31/50 
edited by Brahma Shankara Mishra. 11th ed. 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan; 
1993.
21 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I  (6:9)
Artavavaha Srotas Roga

INTRODUCTION
Asrugdara  is a disease of excessive and 
prolonged blood loss per vagina during 
menstrual and inter menstrual period 
without any palpable pathology. It is one of 
the Rakta Pradosaja Vyadhi . Due to excessive 
blood loss there may be moderate to severe 
anemia associated with loss of appetite, 
fatigue and such other symptoms which may 
hamper the daily activities of women. Severe 
blood loss may lead to an emergency.
Case Definition:
Cyclical bleeding at normal interval; the 
bleeding is either excessive in amount (>80 
ml) or duration (>5 days) or both. Sometimes 
there is short cycle (<21 days) with heavy 
and prolonged menses or acyclic bleeding 
from the uterus. All types of Asrugdara  are 
associated with body ache and pain.
Types:
Table 24.1: Types of Asrigdara with their 
characteristics
Types Features 
Vataja 
AsrugdaraMenstrual fluid frothy, thin, 
blackish and may be associated 
with severe pain in sacral, groin, 
flanks, low back and pelvis.
Pittaja 
AsrugdaraYellowish black in colour, 
hot, fishy odor, profuse flow 
associated with pain, burning 
sensation, thirst, feverish and 
giddiness.Kaphaja 
AsrugdaraSlimy, pale, thick, with clots, mild 
pain, associated with anorexia, 
nausea, feeling of heaviness and 
such other symptoms of Kapha .
Sannipataja 
AsrugdaraPresence of the above features 
according to the predominance 
of Dosha .
Differential Diagnosis:
Asrugdara should be clinically differentiated 
from Pittaja Yonivyapad , Yonigranthi, Yoni 
Arsha, Yoni Arbuda and systemic disorders of 
coagulation defect. 
Table 24.2: Differential diagnosis of Asrigdara
Pittaja Yonivyapad Excessive bleeding only at 
the time of menstruation, 
cervical erosion etc
Asruja Yonivyapad Excessive Bleeding only at 
the time of menstruation 
associated with infertility, 
feverishness and burning.
Yoni Arsha PV examination / USG 
reveals cervical /vaginal 
polypoidal growth
Yoni Arbuda Bleeding on touch, USG / 
PV examination reveals 
tumorous growth.
Yoni  Granthi Menstrual bleeding in 
submucous fibroid.
Line of Treatment
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shamana Chikitsa : Deepana, 
Raktasamgrahana – Primarily Tikta ASRUGDARA  (MENO METRORRHGIA)
158 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESASRUGDARA (MENO METRORRHGIA)
Rasa followed  by Kashaya which  is 
followed by Madhura .
• Rasayana Chikitsa  for Rasa- Rakta- 
Kshaya .
•	Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
•	Treatment prescribed for  Raktatisara, 
Raktapitta, Raktarsha
•	Treatment prescribed for  Adhoga 
RaktapittaLEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Investigations:
•	Blood pressure and Pulse rate to 
assess the general condition
•	Urine pregnancy test - To detect 
pregnancy complications
Treatment: In the initial stage of the disease, 
drugs mentioned in the following table may 
be given as per need.
Table 24.3: Medicines at level 1 for Asrigdara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Nagakesara, Lodhra, 
Shunthi, Mocharasa Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Water
Amalaki Churna1Churna 3-6 gm After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Water
Lodhra Churna2Churna 3-5 gm After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Tandulodaka
Yastimadhu Churna3Churna 2-4 gm After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Milk / water
Shuddha Sphatika4Churna 125-250 mg After meal / 
twice a day2-3 weeks Water
Ashoka Siddha
Kshirapaka5Kshira 
Paka20 ml Empty stomach / 
morning & evening2-3 month -
Kamadudha Rasa6Vati / 
Churna125-500 mg After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Sita / Ghrita
Ashokarishta7Arishta 12-24 ml After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Equal amount 
of water
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Shadangapaneeya,  Tanduloda -
ka, Laja / Lajamanda , food articles of bitter, sweet or astringent in taste, 
milk, wheat, seasoned rice, green 
gram, bitter guard, bottle gourd, 
cucumber, beet root, pomegranate, 
grapes etc. Yusha, Yavagu mixed 
with  Ghrita , Madhura Aushadhi  
ASRUGDARA (MENO METRORRHGIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 159Siddha Ghrita  and meat soup. Pa -
tient should have freshly prepared 
food only. Stale and re-heated food 
should not be taken at all.
• Vihara : Maintain local hygiene , 
take rest.
Don’ts - 
• Ahara : Articles made with Maida , 
sour curd, bakery items like bread, 
biscuits, fermented food, spicy 
and salty food, fried food, pickles, 
Kshara  etc. 
• Vihara : Avoid day sleeping, excess 
exposure to heat, sexual intercourse, 
night awaking, suppression of 
natural urges, strenuous physical 
exercise, excess of fasting, fear, grief 
and anger.
Referral criteria:
•	If the vitals are not stable.
•	If the blood loss is severe 
•	Patients not responding to level 1 
management•	Chronic patients with complications 
like moderate to severe Anaemia, 
severe Dysmenorrhoea, irregular 
bleeding per vagina. 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1: for a 
fresh case reporting directly. 
However, at this level, persistence of 
symptoms along with moderate to severe 
anaemia, mild to moderate fever due to pelvic 
infections etc. should also be considered. 
Investigation: Additional to the examina -
tions described in Level 1 following investi -
gations also may be carried out.
•	CBC and PBS
•	BT, CT
•	Ultrasonography 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, the following drugs 
may also be tried out.
Table 24.4: Medicines at level 2 for Asrigdara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Pushyanuga 
Churna8Churna 3-5 gm After meal / 
thrice a day2-3 months Madhu  / 
Tandulodaka
Bola Parpati9Vati 125-250 mg Morning and 
evening1 month Sharkara , Ghrita , 
Madhu
Panchavalkala 
KwathaKwatha 60 ml Morning 1-3 months Sharkara
Shatavari Ghrita Ghrita 15 ml Morning 1 month -
160 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESASRUGDARA (MENO METRORRHGIA)
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1.
Referral criteria:
•	Patients not responding to two to 
three cycles of treatment
•	Severe Anemia
•	Detection of any pelvic pathology 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly. Persistence 
of symptoms, post-menopausal bleeding, bleeding per vagina with other systemic 
diseases like diabetes, obesity, hypertension, 
severe anemia etc. should also be considered
Investigation: All investigations mentioned 
in Level 2. In addition to that the following 
investigations also may be carried out.
•	Endometrial biopsy to find out 
malignancy
•	Hormonal assay like S. TSH, S. T3, 
T4
•	Fasting blood sugar, Post prandial 
blood sugar
•	Saline infusion sonography to find 
out endometrial polyp
Treatment:  In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level 2, following medicines 
could be prescribed:
Table 24.5: Medicines at level 3 for Asrigdara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shonitargala 
Rasa10Vati / 
Churna2 Vati
(125-500 mg)After meal / 
twice a day2-3 month Water / 
Tandulodaka
Trunakanata Mani 
PishtiPishti 250 mg Morning and 
Evening1-2 months Ghrita
Dhatri Lauha Vati 500 mg Morning and 
evening2-3 months Guda Ghrita
Tapyadi Lauha Vati 500 mg Morning and 
evening2-3 months Guda Ghrita
Bahushala Guda Avaleha 30 gm Before meals 1-2 months Water
Patients with other systemic diseases can be 
referred to their respective departments.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1.
ASRUGDARA (MENO METRORRHGIA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1611. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH, pg. 8.
2. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH, pg. 113.
3. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH, pg. 169.
4. Shuddha Sphatika, Ayurved Prakasha, 
pg. 257-258.
5. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH, pg. 18.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 2, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003, pg. 234.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003, pg. 8.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003, pg. 113.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003, pg. 217.
10. Rasatantrasara, Siddhaprayoga Sangraha, 
Volume 2, pg. 531.REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION
Menstruation associated with pain is a 
common problem in females of reproductive 
age. Kashtartava (Dysmenorrhoea) is a 
cardinal symptom in Udavarta Yoni Vyapad . 
It can be caused either by Margavarodha 
(obstruction) or Ksheenata  (depletion) of Raja.
Case Definition:
Chronic, cyclic pain or discomfort in the 
pelvic region during menstrual period.
Differential diagnosis:
1) Vatala Yoni Vyapada: menstruation with 
Toda  (pricking pain) [vitiated Ruksha 
Guna ], Stambha (stiffness) [vitiated Sheeta 
Guna ] along with other Vataja  Lakshanas . 
2) Suchimukhi Yoni Vyapad: Margavarodha 
Janya Vata Prakopa causing  severe 
pain with structural abnormalities 
which may need dilation or invasive  
procedures.
3) Udavarta Yoni Vyapad:  severe pain at 
the beginning of menstruation and 
immediate relief of pain following 
discharge of menstrual blood is the 
characteristic symptom
4) Antarmukhi Yoni Vyapad: Margavarodha 
Janya Vata Prakopa  due to acute 
anteversion or retroversion of Uterus  
causing  severe pain and relieved by 
discharge of menstrual fluid.5) Paripluta Yoni Vyapad: continuous pain 
for the entire duration of menstrual 
period associated with dysperunea.
6) Vataja Rajo Vriddhi: Bheda (cutting 
Pain) [vitiated Ruksha and Khara Guna ] 
associated with increase in menstrual 
flow
7) Raja Ksheenata:  Bheda (cutting Pain) 
[vitiated Ruksha and Khara Guna ] 
associated with decrease in menstrual 
flow
8) Generalized disease conditions like: 
Pandu, Shosha , Rajayakshma 
Line of Treatment
Aggravated Vata due to either obstruction or 
depletion  is the main cause for the Kashtartava , 
therefore, the treatment is directed either to 
remove the obstruction by medical / surgical 
measures or to replenish the Dhatus . 
Following are the principles:
•	To reduce pain – pain relieving 
medications
•	To treat dryness and roughness – 
Oily preparations for external and 
internal use Vatanulomana  – mild 
laxatives and Basti
•	To remove structural obstruction 
by surgical intervention
•	To remove functional obstruction – 
Fomentations, Shodhana (purifying 
measures)KASHTARTAVA  (DYSMENORRHOEA)
KASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 163
• Dhatupurana  – Nourishing, General 
tonics and Dhatu Vriddhikara  
medication 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis: Painful menstruation; 
pain begins just few hours before 
menstruation. The pain is spasmodic or dull in nature, confined to lower abdomen and 
may radiate to back and medial aspect of 
thighs gradually and sometimes associated 
with nausea, diarrhoea or constipation, 
dizziness, fatigue and headache.
Investigation:   Hb gm% to rule out anemia
Treatment: During the initial phase of the 
disease, one or more drugs from the table can 
be selected as per the status of the patient.
Table 25.1: Medicines at level 1 for Kashtaartava
Drugs Dosage 
form Dose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Eranda Taila Oil 10-25 ml Stat Stat Shunthi Kwatha
Eranda Bhrishta 
Haritaki1 (4 gm 
with Shunthi-1-
2gm)*Powder 3-6 gm Before meal/ 
twice a day Eight days 
before the 
scheduled start 
of menstruationLuke warm 
water
Hingvadi 
Churna2** Powder 2-4 gm Before meal/ 
twice dailyDuring 
Menstruation 
till pain subside Luke warm 
water/ 
buttermilk
Shankha Vati3Tablet 1 tab 250-
500 mg After meal/ 
thrice dailyDuring 
Menstruation 
till pain subside Luke warm 
water/ 
buttermilk/ 
honey
Hingvadi 
Gutika4Tablet 250-500mg After meal/ twice 
dailyDuring 
Menstruation 
till pain subside Luke warm 
water
Chaturbeeja5 
ChurnaPowder 2- 3 gm Morning and 
evening empty 
stomach, if H/o 
gastritis take after 
meal for 10 days 
(starting from 
7 days before 
commencement 
of menses till 
3rd day of the 
bleeding phase)For 2-3 month Luke warm 
water / 
buttermilk
164 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
Dashamoola 
Kwatha with 
Tila oilDecoction 30-40 ml Morning and 
evening empty 
stomach2-3 days
Milk 
medicated 
with 
Dashamoola6Medicated 
milk 20 ml Morning and 
evening empty 
stomach2-3 days -
Abhayarishta7Arishta  - 
liquid12-24 ml After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 month  With equal 
amount of 
water
* For Anulomana of Apana Vayu
** For relieving of pain 
cardamom, ginger and mustard 
seeds, meat soup, and chicken. 
•	Vihara: Bath with warm water, 
Fomentation with hot water/ 
decoction of Dashamoola  or heating 
pad on lower abdomen and low 
back. Take sufficient physical and  
mental rest. Yogasana  like Bhadrasana , 
Bhujangasana  and Shalabhasana and  
Pranayama  regularly. 
Don’ts
•	Ahara : Food items causing  abdomi -
nal distention  and constipation such 
as: Chick-peas, excess consumption 
of legumes, raw vegetables, Maida  
and other food items heavy for di -
gestion, cold food items, etc.
•	Vihara: Cold water bath, Exposure 
to cold weather or air, Dry 
massage ( Udavartana ), Day sleep 
(Divaswapna ), Night awaking, 
Excessive walking, Excessive 
exercises, and Suppression of 
natural urges like Mutra, Purisha  
and Adhovata  etc. Local treatment:  Massage of the lower 
abdomen with warm Tila Taila / Sarshapa Taila  
/ Narayana  Taila  for 10 to 15 minutes, followed 
by application of hot fomentation (such 
as a hot water bag). Advice to put vaginal 
tampon ( Yonipichu ) of Luke warm Tila Taila 
or Hingvadi Taila at least for 7 days at night 
before menstruation in married women.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s ( Pathya )
•	Ahara : Unctuous & warm, sweet, 
sour, salty substances, dairy 
products like milk, buttermilk 
etc., rice & wheat., soup made 
of ghee, rice and Mung Daal , 
Sugarcane, Sugarcane products 
and honey. Oils- especially, 
sesame, peanut, mustard, fruits 
like grapes, papaya etc. Vegetables 
like radish, drumstick etc. Foods 
may be garnished with spices like 
cumin, asafetida, black pepper, 
cloves, coriander, mint, cinnamon, 
KASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 165Referral criteria: Patients not responding 
to level 1 management should be referred to 
higher centre.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directly. 
Patients having symptoms like dull lower 
abdominal pain situated in back and front 
without any radiation; lower abdominal discomfort starting before a few days of 
menses etc. should be considered. 
Investigation: Same as Level 1. In addition 
to that, the following investigations may also 
be carried out.
•	Ultrasonography to detect pelvic 
pathology
•	CBC, ESR, 
Treatment:  In addition to the  drugs men -
tioned in Level 1, the following drugs may 
also be given.
Table 25.2: Medicines at level 2 for Kashtaartava
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Devadarvyadi 
Kwatha8Decoction 30-40 ml Morning and 
evening empty 
stomach2-3 days -
Rajahpravartani 
Vati9Tablet 1-2 tablet 
of 250 mgAfter meal / twice 
dailyFrom 
15thday of 
the cycle 
till onset of 
menses Luke warm 
water / Tila 
Kashaya / 
Kulatta  Kashaya
Yogaraja Guggulu Vati 2-4 tab of 
250 mgAfter meal / twice 
daily7days Luke warm 
water / 
Dashamula 
Kwatha
Mahanarayana 
Taila10oil 10-20ml Stat Stat Warm water
Basti (one of the Panchakarma  procedures), 
in which medicated oils and decoction are 
administered as enema, is regarded as the 
best procedure to treat diseases caused by Vata Dosha . Basti  should be administered 
during inter menstrual period.
Basti  is given as per cited in classics with 
following Niruha  and Anuvasana Basti
166 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
Pathya -apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria:
•	Patients not responding to two to 
three cycles of treatment
•	Detection of pelvic pathology 
•	Associated complaints like fever, 
scanty menses or heavy periods 
•	Other systemic diseases like 
appendicitis, colitis, cystitis etc. 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directly. 
Persistence of symptoms with associated 
complaints like fever, scanty menses or 
heavy periods or other systematic diseases 
like appendicitis, colitis, cystitis etc. should 
also be considered.Investigations:  All investigations mentioned 
in Level 1 & Level 2. In addition to that the 
following investigations also may be carried 
out.
•	Urinalysis: To detect urinary tract 
infection
•	Stool test: To detect GI bleeding
•	Hysteroscopy and saline 
Sonohysterography: To rule out 
endometrial polyps and sub 
mucosal leiomyomas
•	MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging): 
Best for diagnosis of congenital 
uterine anomalies. To diagnose 
fibroids and to differentiate it from 
ovarian mass or pregnancy 
•	Intravenous pyelogram: Intrave -
nous pyelogram is indicated if uter -
ine malformation is confirmed as a 
cause or contributing factor for the 
dysmenorrhoea 
•	Endometrial biopsy: To detect 
endometritis
•	Laparoscopy: To reach into the 
definite diagnosis of endometriosis, 
pelvic inflammatory disease, or 
pelvic adhesionsTable 25.3: Basti Dravyas  at level 2 for Kashtaartava
Matra Basti Niruha Basti Kshira Basti
Dashamoola Taila11Palashadi Niruha Basti12Dashamoola Kshira13
Trivrita Taila14– –
Tila Taila15– –
Mahanarayana Taila16– –
KASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 167Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and 2, following management should 
be done as per associated complaints.In Kashtartava  with heavy bleeding, 
following medicines can be given as per  
complaints. 
Table 25.4: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with heavy bleeding
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Pradarari Lauha17 Tablet 2 tablets 
(250 mg)Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month Milk or 
water
Patrangasva Asava 
liquid30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month water
Khadirarishtha Arishtha 
liquid30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month water
Pathadi Kwatha Decoction 30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month water
In Kashtartava  with Scanty bleeding, following medicines can be given as per complaints. 
Table 25.5: Medicines at level 3 for Kashtaartava  with scanty bleeding
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Kumaryasava Asava 
liquid30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month Water
Karpasamulasava Asava 
liquid30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month Water
Shatapushpa Kwatha Decoction 30-40 ml Morning and evening 
after meal2-3 month water
Pathya -apathya  (Diet and life style education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1 The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH:63
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:118
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:194
168 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKASHTARTAVA (DYSMENORRHOEA)
4 Kaviraj Shri Ambikadatta Shastri, 
Bhaishajya Ratnaavali, Chikitsasthana 
30/19, Chaukambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 446
5 The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, 
Part 1, Volume 1, Ed 1st, Government of 
India, Ministry of health and family welfare, 
Department of AYUSH: 38, API Volume 
2,114
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:55
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:6
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003: 74
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:192
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:14911 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 2, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:143
12 Acharya Jadavaji Trikamji, Charaka 
Samhita, Chakrapanidatta, Siddhisthana 
3/44-45, Ayurveda Dipika commentary, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan: 2008:696
13 Acharya Jadavaji Trikamji, Charaka 
Samhita, Chakrapanidatta, Chikitsasthana 
30/110-111, Ayurveda Dipika, commentary, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan:2008:639
14 Acharya Jadavaji Trikamji, Charaka 
Samhita, Chakrapanidatta, Chikitsasthana 
30/110-111, Ayurveda Dipika, commentary, 
Chaukhamba Prakashan: 2008:639
15 Bhavprakash of Sri Bhavmisra, Commentary 
by Shri Brahmasankara Mishra and Shri 
Rupalalaji Vaishya, Taila varga, 2-7, 10th 
edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varansi, 2002.
16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:149
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:285
INTRODUCTION
Leucorrhoea means an excessive amount of 
white discharge from vagina due to inflam -
mation or infections of lower genital tract, 
causing discomfort. This is a condition of 
vitiated Kapha and Rasa  Dhatu. The discharge 
could be of thin watery, purulent, slimy, 
sticky, frothy with foul smell and curdy 
white depending upon vitiation of Dosha .
Case Definition:
The excess secretion is evident from 
persistent vulval moistness or staining 
of the undergarments or need to wear a 
sanitary pad. Non–infective discharge is 
non-purulent, non-offensive, non-irritant 
and never leads to pruritus vulva. Infective 
discharge is purulent, offensive, and irritant 
associated with itching.
Differential diagnosis:
Disease conditions having Shweta Srava : 
•	Kaphaja Yonivyapad : Yellowish 
white thick mucoid discharge 
associated with severe itching 
•	Upapulta Yonivyapad : Whitish 
mucoid vaginal discharge with 
pricking pain in vagina
•	Sannipatika Yonivyapad
•	Rakta Gulma : Foul smelling muco-
purulent discharge associated with 
amenorrhoea and uterine growth 
•	Karnini Yonivyapada : White dis -
charge associated with oedematous cervix and cervical erosion or only 
cervix erosion
•	Atyananda Yonivyapada (Achara -
na / Vipluta ): White discharge with 
severe itching due to unhygienic 
condition 
•	Yoni Arsha : Foul smell reddish 
white discharge, on examination 
reveals presence of Yoni Arsha  
with bulky uterus with polypodial 
growth
General disease conditions like anemia, 
diabetes mellitus, etc. 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis:  Thin whitish watery, 
odourless discharge from the vagina. 
General condition of patient may reveal ill  
health.
Investigation: proper clinical examination
Treatment: 
•	Eradication of the cause/local 
hygiene etc.
• Kaphaghana  medicines
•	Local applications in the form of 
Dhavana, Varti, Picchu, Dhupana
• Kshara, Agni Karma
In the initial stage of the disease, drugs 
mentioned in the following table may be 
given as per need.SHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
170 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
Table 26.1: Medicines at level 1 for Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Sphatika Bhasma with  
Shuddha GandhakaChurna 500 mg Twice/thrice daily 1 week Water
Amalaki Churna1Churna 3-6 g After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 months Honey/sugar/ 
water 
Lodhra Churna2Churna 3-5 gm After meal/ thrice 
daily2-3 months Tandulodaka
Chopachini Churna3Churna 2-3 gm After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 months Water
Darvyadi Kwatha4Decoction 30-40 ml Empty stomach 
twice daily 2-3 months -
Pradarari Lauha5Tablet 1-2 Vati After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 months -
Chandraprabha Vati6Tablet 2 Vati After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 months Water/ milk
general disease condition such as to 
avoid sweets etc. in diabetics, stale 
food etc.
•	Vihara : Over eating, intercourse, 
day sleeping, mental stress, sup -
pression of natural urges, use of 
synthetic under garments
Referral criteria:
•	Patients not responding to level 1 
management 
•	Chronic patients 
•	Symptoms like purulent, offensive 
irritant blood stained discharge 
with mild to severe pruritus vulva
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directly. Local treatment:  Douche with Sphatika Jala / 
Triphala Kwatha / Panchavalkala Kwatha /  
Nimba Patra Kwatha - twice a day for 5-7 days.
Pichu  with Dhatkyadi Taila / Karanja Taila / 
Neem Taila.
Pathya -Apathya  (diet and life style 
education):
Do’s ( Pathya )
•	Ahara : Fresh vegetables, fruits, 
milk, Mudga / Mamsa Rasa Yusha  
and easily digestible food. Patient 
should take freshly prepared food 
only.
•	Vihara: Maintain local hygiene , 
celibacy, 
Don’ts: 
•	Ahara : Dietary restrictions may 
be followed as per the prevailing 
SHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 171Examination:  Per speculum and per vaginal 
examination should be done to find out 
vaginitis or cervical pathology. 
Investigation: Following investigations may 
be carried out:
•	Heamogram
•	BSL•	Pap smear - To detect pelvic 
infection
•	VDRL, HIV - To detect sexually 
transmitting diseases
•	USG to rule out growth
Treatment: Drugs for external or local  
use
Table 26.2: Medicines used for Yoni Prakshalana in Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of administration Duration
Nyagrodhadi Kwatha7Decoction 400 to 
500 ml 
(48 gm)Twice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Panchavalkala Kwatha8Decoction 400 to 
500 mlTwice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Nimba Patra Kwatha9Decoction 500 ml Twice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Triphala Kwatha  with 
Takra  or cow’s urine, 
Sphatika ChurnaDecoction 400 to 
500 mlTwice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Guduchi , Triphala  and 
Danti KwathaDecoction 400 to 
500 mlTwice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Chandana Kwatha/ 
Lodhra KwathaDecoction 400 to 
500 mlTwice daily
morning & evening8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Pushyanuga Churna10Churna 3-5 gm After meal/ thrice daily 2-3 months
Table 26.3: Medicines used as Yoni Varti in Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of administration Duration
Varti  of fine powder 
of Lodhra , Yashtimadhu  
and MadhuVarti 5 gm At night 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Varti  of fine powder 
of Nimba, Triphala, 
Sphatika  and MadhuVarti 5 gm At night 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
The above mentioned suppositories can be prepared locally in any hospital 
172 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
Table 26.4: Medicines used as Yoni Pichu in Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration
Dhatakyadi Taila Oil 5 ml Twice daily 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Nyagrodha Kashaya Pichu Decoction 5 ml Twice daily 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Karanja Taila Oil 5 ml Twice daily 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Jatyadi Taila11Oil 5 ml Twice daily 8 to 10 days after 
menstruation
Table 26.5: Medicines used for Yoni Dhupan in Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dose Time of 
administrationDuration
Dhupana of Sarala, Guggulu  and Yava with Ghruta 5 gm Twice daily 1-2 week
Haridra  and Daruharidra 5 gm Twice daily 1-2 week
•	Presence of pre malignant or 
malignant changes in PAP  
smear 
•	Blood stained vaginal discharge Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria:
•	Patients not responding the above 
treatmentOral Medications  – All drugs mentioned in Level 1. In addition to that the following drugs 
may also be tried.
Table 26.6: Medicines at level 2 for Shweta Pradara
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
 Triphala Guggulu Vati 2 - 3 Vati After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 
monthsWater/milk/ Ushira  
Kashaya
Kaishora Guggulu12Vati 2 – 3 Vati After meal/ twice 
daily2-3 
monthsWater/milk
SHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 173LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT
HOSPITAL/ INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1: For a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation: In addition to the investiga -
tions mentioned at Level 2, following inves -
tigations may also be carried out. 
•	Microscopic examination of vaginal 
discharge (wet vaginal smear test)
•	Fungal and aerobic culture of 
vaginal discharge•	Colposcopy
•	Punch biopsy or Cone biopsy 
(Cervix) or endometrial Biopsy to 
rule out cervical malignancy.
Treatment: In addition to the treatment 
mentioned in levels 1 & 2, following therapies 
can be performed in Level 3 with due care.
•	Local Agni Karma  (cauterization) in 
premalignant lesions of cervix
• Kshara Karma
In case of suspected malignancy, patient 
must be referred for advanced management.
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 1st, Gov-
ernment of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Department of AYUSH:7
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 1st, Gov-
ernment of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Department of AYUSH:112
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 
2003:735 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 
2003:285
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 
2003:185
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 
2003:57
8 Anonymous, Anonymous, The Ayurvedic 
Formulary of India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 2nd, 
174 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSHWETA SRAVA (LEUCORRHOEA) 
Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., 
New Delhi, 2003
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmaco -
poeia of India, Part 1, Vol. 1, Ed. 1st, Gov-
ernment of India, Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare, Department of AYUSH:  
131
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:113
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:135
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Part 1, Volume 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of I.S.M. & H., New 
Delhi, 2003:67
Vata Vyadhi

INTRODUCTION
Avabahuka  is a Vatavyadhi  caused by vitiation 
of Vata  at ‘Amsamoola’  (shoulder) leading to 
restriction of shoulder movement. Amsashosha  
(wasting around the muscles of shoulder 
joint) is a typical feature of Avabahuka  in long 
run. Patient experiences difficulty in lifting 
the shoulder with or without pain. Clinical 
conditions like frozen shoulder, brachial 
neuralgia etc. are similar with Avabahuka . 
Case definition:
Restricted shoulder movement and difficulty 
in lifting the arm associated with or without 
pain, begins gradually and worsen over time 
leading to atrophy in shoulder muscles is 
defined as Avabahuka . 
Differential Diagnosis:
a. Manyasthambha  
b. Viswachi 
c. Amavata  and such other diseases of 
Shoulder joint –Line of Management
• Nidana Parivarjana  should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa - Nasya
• Shamana Chikitsa  - Pachana, Deepana, 
Snehana, Swedana,
• External applications -  Lepa, 
Upanaha 
• Rasayana Chikitsa  for Mamsadhatu
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for Vatavyadhi
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations:  Nil 
Treatment:  See table 27.1AVABAHUKA (FROZEN SHOULDER)
Table 27.1: Medicines at level 1 for Avabahuka
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Aswagandha 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice a day 2-4 weeks Luke warm 
water
Bala Churna Churna 3-5 gm Twice a day 2-4 weeks Luke warm 
water
178 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAVABAHUKA (FROZEN SHOULDER)
Rasna Churna Churna 3-5 gm Twice a day 2-4 weeks Luke warm 
water
Chopchini Churna 2-5 gm Twice a day 2-4 weeks Sugar – 3 gm
Dashamoola 
KashayaKwatha 10-15 ml Empty stomach / 6 
am & 6 pm2-4 weeks Luke warm 
water
Yogaraja 
Guggulu1Vati 1-2 tab Twice day 2-4 weeks With warm 
water
Anutaila Taila 1 ml 4-5 times as 
Pratimarsha Nasya2 weeks -
Karpasasthydi 
TailaTaila 1 ml 4-5 times as 
Pratimarsha Nasya2 weeks -
3-5 ml 1-2 times for oral 
administration2 weeks -
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigation:  Same as level 1, in addition
• Random blood sugar to rule out 
Diabetes Mellitus.
• Rheumatoid factor (RA Factor) - 
Qualitative (present / absent) and 
quantitative (<15 IU/ml) to rule out 
RA shoulder. 
• X - ray of shoulder / cervical spine 
Treatment: In addition to the Shamana  
management mentioned in Level 1, few of 
the following drugs may be added - Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life  
style): 
Do’s -
• Ahara : Nourishing food, milk 
porridge, Shali, Shashtik, Kulattha , 
Udada (black gram), Shigru 
(drumstick), brinjal etc. 
• Vihara : Shoulder exercises
Dont’s -
• Ahara : Kalaya (Lathyrus odoratus ), 
Sheetambu (cold water).
• Vihara : Nothing specific
Referral criteria: Cases not responding to 
above line of treatment.
AVABAHUKA (FROZEN SHOULDER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 179Table 27.2: Medicines at level 2 for Avabahuka
Drug Dosage 
FormDose Time of Administration Anupana
Ksheerabala 101 Avarthi Taila 15 drops Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
before food-
Guggulu Tiktakam 
KwathaKwatha 12-24 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
empty stomach-
Prasaranyadi Kashaya Kwatha 12-24 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
empty stomachLater milk 
porridge
Maharasnadi Kwatha2Kwatha 12-24 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
empty stomachShunthi Churna / 
Pippali Churna / 
Yogaraja Guggulu / 
Eranda Taila
Vidaryadi Kwatha3Kwatha 12-24 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
empty stomach-
Dhanwantharam Kwatha Kwatha 12-24 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks / 
empty stomachDhanwantharam 
tablet
Guggulu Tiktaka Ghrita4Ghee 15-30 ml Once or Twice a day for 2-4 
weeksBefore food on 
appetite
Aswagandharishta5Arishta 10-20 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks After food
Balarishta6Arishta 10-20 ml Twice a day for 2-4 weeks After food
Nirgundi Taila Taila For External Application
Vishagarbha Taila7Taila For External Application
Vatagajankusha Rasa8Churna 60-125 mg Twice a day Madhu  
Vatavidhwamsana  Rasa9Churna 60-125 mg Twice a day Madhu  
Prasarini Taila10Taila 10-15 
dropsOnce or twice a 
day / before mealsWith Prasaranyadi  Kashaya
Karpasasthydi Tail11 / 
Kuzhampu, Taila Taila  for head and external application. Kuzhambu  for external 
application only
Parinatha Keryadi Taila Taila External application
Local  Abhyanga and Nadi Sweda , Snigdha 
Churna Pinda Sweda, Patrapinda Sweda, 
Jambeera Pinda Sweda and Shashtika Pinda 
Sweda etc can be according to the condition . Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
Referral Criteria: Cases not responding to 
above therapy.
180 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESAVABAHUKA (FROZEN SHOULDER)
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directlyInvestigation: Nothing specific
Treatment: In addition to the manage -
ment of Level 1 and Level -2, if needed 
Panchakarma  procedures can be performed. 
Nasya  may be done with classical  
dosage.
Table 27.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Avabahuka
No Karma Choice of drugs Indications Remarks
1 Udwartana Kolakulathadi Churna; 
Yava, Kola, Kulatha;
Triphala churna;Associated neck pain, 
recurrent respiratory infections Considering Vata  
vitiation at Kapha 
Sthana
2 Swedana Tapa, Ushma, Upanaha 
Various articles- In persistent pain without Pitta 
symptomsUpanaha 
3 Churna Pinda
SwedaKolakulathadi Yoga,  
Various Vata / Kaphahara 
ChurnaEarly stages of Avabahuka, 
Sama, Kapha SamsrishtaContra indicated  
in Anupasthambha 
Vata, Pittanubandha 
4 Patra Pinda
SwedaVarious leaves of Vata 
alleviating propertyUsually After Churna Pinda 
Sweda,  directly on Nirama stagePittanubandha 
contra indicated
5 Jambeera 
Pinda SwedaCitrus fruit, turmeric and 
Vata  alleviating ChurnaSame as above + Localised 
oedemaPittanubandha 
contraindicated
6 Shashtikashali 
Pinda Sweda 
/ Shashtika 
LepanaShashtika  rice, Bala Kwatha  
and milkLater stages of Avabahuka, 
disuse atrophy, wasting, 
weakness, PittanubandhaContraindicated  
in Kaphanubandha, 
Saama
7 Navana / 
NasyaAnutaila / Ksheera Bala 
(Avarthi), Dhanwantara 
(Avarthi), Shadabindu Taila
Mahamasha Taila12,
Mashabaladi Kashaya13
Katphala ChurnaIn all  Avabahuka Care for 
contraindications 
of Nasya
8 Moordha 
Taila – (Shiro 
abhyanga 
Shiro Pichu 
Shirodhara, 
Shirobasti)Various Taila explained 
for application on headIn Later stages of Avabahuka , 
insomnia, stress Vata Pradhana  
stageContraindicated 
in chronic / 
recurrent sinusitis 
associated with 
head ache and 
Shiro Abhyanga 
Anupashaya
9 Upanaha Upanaha Churna, Salwana Wasting and painful 
conditionsContraindicated in 
Skin allergy
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same as level 1
AVABAHUKA (FROZEN SHOULDER)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1811. Govind Das Sen, Amavata Rogadhikara 
29/152-157, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, pg. 607.
2. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailaja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/90-96, pg. 149.
3. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Sutra Sthana 15/9-10, 
pg. 141.
4. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa Sthana 21/58-61, 
pg. 572.
5. Govind Das Sen, Murchha Rogadhikara 
21/16-22, Bhaishajya Ratnavali Siddhiprada 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Varanasi, pg.492.
6. Govind Das Sen, Vata Vyadhi Rogadhikara 
26/572-575, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, pg. 570.
7. Govind Das Sen, Vatarakta Rogadhikara 
26/595, Bhaishajya Ratnavali Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Varanasi, pg. 415.
8. Rasendra Sara Sangraha Vatavyadhi 
Chikitsa.
9. Yogaratnakara, Vaidya Lakshmi Pati 
Shastri, Vidyotini Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Reprint 
2013 Vatavyadhi Chikitsa Adhyaya 1-3,  
pg. 546.
10. Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailaja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/270-272, pg. 154.
11. K Nisteshwara, Sahasra Yogam with Eng -
lish Translation, Chowkhambha Sanskrit 
Series, Varanasi, third edition 2011, Taila 
Prakarana, pg. 118.
12. Chakrapani, Chakradatta, Indradev 
Tripathi, Vaidya Prabha Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Bhawan, Varanasi, 
Reprint 2014, Chakradatta Vatavyadhi 
Chikitsa 22/192-200, pg. 148.
13. Chakrapani, Chakradatta, Indradev 
Tripathi, Vaidya Prabha Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Bhawan, Varanasi, 
Reprint 2014, Chakradatta Vatavyadhi 
Chikitsa 22/23-24, pg. 135REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION
Katigraha  is common disorder explained in 
the context of Vatavyadhi . It is characterized 
by vitiation of Vata  at Kati Pradesha . It leads 
to pain and stiffness in the low back region 
restricting all lumbar movements. The 
disease explained is similar with Low Back 
Pain due to spinal causes. 
Case definition:
Katigraha  is defined as an acute or chronic 
pain in the lumbo-sacral region with stiff -
ness. There are two clinical presentations as 
Upastambhi  Vata  and Anupastambhi Vata . 
Differential Diagnosis:
• Mutra /Purisha  Vega Dharana
• Shweta Pradara
• Yoni Vyapada
• Amavata
• Kapha-Pittaja Tritiyaka Jwara
• Gridhrasi
• PCOS/PCOD
• Ankylosing spondylitis
Line of Management
Katigraha is managed according to clinical 
presentation. In Samavata  presentations, 
Rooksha Sweda, Pachana and Shodhana  are 
done initially. After establishing Nirama  
stage, Local Snehana  procedures, Snigdha  Sweda  as well as classical Basti  procedures 
are performed. Katibasti  and bandages as 
Snigdha  Veshtana  are very effective.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/ PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentations
Patient Examination –  A detailed history 
and examination of lumbar spine, hip joints 
and Straight Leg Raise (SLR) test / Femoral 
Stretch Test (FST).
Investigations: Nil
Treatment:  In Level 1 also some minimal 
Panchakarma  procedures can be done in  
OPD. 
• In Samavata conditions, Rooksha 
Lepa like Nagaradi Lepa or Dashanga 
Lepa / Gandhabiroja Lepa  / Maidalakdi 
Lepa etc. can be applied over lumbo-
sacral region. 
• Katipichu or Katibasti with  Murivenna, 
Dhanwataram Taila or Nirgundyadi 
Taila  etc can be performed later. 
• Mridu Samshodhana with  Eranda 
Taila mixed with  Nirgundi Swarasa 
can be given in patients with 
constipation. 
• Patient may be advised Matravasti 
with  Dhanwantaram Taila  in or 
Sahacharadi Taila  if found to be 
Anupastambhi Vata  KATIGRAHA  (LUMBAGO)
KATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 183
Table 28.1: Medicines at level 1 for Katigraha
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Aswagandha + 
Pippalimoola Churna Powder 3-5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Rasna Churna Powder 3-5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Shunthi Churna Powder 3-5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Chopchini Powder .5-2 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Sugar – 3 gm
Rasnasaptakam 
Kashaya1Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water and 
Nagara  Churna
Saptasaram Kashaya2Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Erandamoola Kashaya Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach /6 
am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Dashamoola Kashaya3Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach /6 
am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Eranda Bija Kshira 
PakaMedicated 
milk7 seeds/
dayOnce in morning 
empty stomach1 week Nil
Yogaraja Guggulu4Vati 1-2 Tab Twice daily 1-2 weeks With warm 
water 
Simhanada Guggulu5Vati 1-2 Tab Twice daily 1-2 weeks With warm 
water 
Sahacharadi Taila6 
(Madhyama Paka)Oil 10-15 
dropsOnce or Twice 
daily1-2 weeks With 
Sahachardi  
Kashaya
Eranda Taila, 
Gandharwahastadi 
Eranda Taila, 
Nimbamritadi Eranda 
TailaOil 15-50 ml In early morning 
in empty stomach 
or at bed timeAs per 
need With hot water 
or milk
Murivenna/ Sahachardi Taila/ Kuzhampu, Karpasasthydi Taila / Kuzhampu, Dhanwntharam Taila / 
Kuzhampu, Nirgundyadi Taila, Bala Taila etc For External application
184 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style): 
Since the disease may be caused and 
aggravated by fall, acute sprains on bending 
forward, lifting objects, hard works etc. 
and absolute bed rest is essential initially 
to reduce the local inflammatory responses. 
All situations leading to Apana Vata Prakopa  
should be avoided. 
Do’s–
• Ahara : The patient should be pro -
vided easily digesting, nutritional 
and anti flatulent type of food. The 
food articles should be fiber rich to 
prevent constipation. These include 
leafy vegetables, green salads, 
fruits, barley etc . Vata  alleviating 
food articles prepared with ghee or 
any suitable oil, Udada (black gram), 
Shigru Shaka (drumstick), brinjal 
etc may be given. Patola, Rasona,  
Dadima, Parushaka, Badara, Draksha, 
may be advised by the patient. Shali, 
Shashtik, Kulattha,  Wheat products 
etc. are suitable. Vegetable soups 
are recommended.
• Vihara : Regular exercise along with 
Abhyanga, Mardana, Avgahana or 
Samvahana . Timely sleeping is very 
important. It  is always ideal to use 
hot water for drinking as well as 
bathing. Controlled physiotherapy 
to regain range of movement can be 
advised in milder form. Comfortable 
seats and bed should be used. Bowel 
and bladder responses should be 
attended timely. Healthy postures 
are to be adopted always. After the 
symptoms are subsided, regular 
Surynamaskara  may be performed.Dont’s–
• Ahara : Use of food items like 
Chanaka (Bengal gram), Kalaya 
(lathyrus) , Kordusha (millets) , 
Shyamaka, Rajmasha, Sheetambu (cold 
water) should be avoided. Pungent 
/astringent food like red chilies, 
excessive use of all spices, diet 
with low water content like wafers, 
biscuits etc should be discouraged. 
• Vihara : Chinta (excessive thinking) , 
Prajagarana (improper sleep at 
night) , Vega Vidharana (suppression 
of natural urges) , Shrama (excess 
hard work) should be avoided. Hard 
exercises are not good. It is better 
to avoid sponge like mattresses 
and easy chairs. Forward bending, 
lifting articles etc are to be done 
very cautiously. 
Referral criteria:
1. Cases not responding to above line of 
Shamana  management.
2. Chronic cases of Katigraha  with 
recurrent sprains require well planned 
Panchakarma treatment .
3. Acute cases of Katigraha  with severe pain 
which require strict bed rest and traction 
massages etc.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES 
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
KATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 185Investigation : Same as level 1: in  
addition
• USG abdomen & pelvis – to rule 
out any visceral pathology and 
Gynecological issues related to 
uterus and adnexa and PID leading 
to low back pain. 
• USG – KUB – To rule out renal calculi 
and obstructive lower urinary tract 
symptoms.
• CT Scan– For better assessment of 
bony canal• MRI – Lumbosacral – For better 
assessment soft tissue pathologies.
Treatment:  In addition to the Shamana  man -
agement mentioned in Level 1, few of the 
following drugs may be added as per the 
requirement and status of the patient. Inten -
sive combination therapies of Rasaushadhi 
and Kashthoushadhi  (herbo-mineral drugs) or 
herbal drugs containing potentially harm -
ful ingredients can also be used cautiously 
at this level. Patient may be kept under  
observation while prescribing these kinds of  
medicines.
Table 28.2: Medicines at level 2 for Katigraha
Drug Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
AdministrationDuration Anupana
Sanjivani Vati Vati 125-250 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm water
Agnitundi Vati Vati 125-250 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm water
Soubhagya Shunthi Paka Avaleha 5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm water
Gugguluthikthaka Ghrita7Ghee 15-30 ml Once or twice 
daily1-2 weeks Before food 
on appetite
Abhayarishta8Arishta 10-20 ml Twice daily 1-2 weeks After food
Balarishta9Arishta 10-20 ml Twice daily 1-2 weeks After food
Dhanwantaram Taila10 
(7-10 1 Avarthi )Oil 10-15 drops Once or Twice 
daily1-2 weeks –
Murivenna/ Sahachardi 
Taila/ Kuzhampu, 
Karpasasthydi Taila / 
Kuzhampu, Prasarini 
taila/ Vishagarbha Taila / 
Dhanwntharam Taila / 
Kuzhampu, Nirgundyadi 
Taila, Ksheera Bala Taila11Oil For External 
application. 
Kuzhambu  
applied 
externally only. 
Suitable Taila  
can be used for 
Anuvasana  also.Twice daily 1-2 weeks –
Vatagajankusha Rasa Powder 60-125 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Madhu
Vatavidhwamsa Rasa12Powder 60-125 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Madhu  
186 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
• The patient may be subjected to 
local  Abhyanga and Bashpa Sweda 
or traction massage with  Murivenna, 
Sahacharadi Taila, Karpasasthydi Taila 
etc.
• Snigdhachurna Pinda Sweda, 
Patrapotala Sweda, and Jambheera 
Pinda Sweda and Shashtika Pinda 
Sweda may be tried. 
• Anuvasana Basti may be given with  
Dhanwantharm Taila, Sahacharadi 
Taila etc and  Madhutailika Basti or 
Erandamooladi Nirooha Basti  may be 
done.
• The details of Shodhana  treatment 
protocol is available in Level 3. 
It may be incorporated as per 
feasibility and availability
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style) : Same 
as level 1
Referral Criteria:
1. Cases not responding to above therapy 
and require well planned Panchakarma  
therapy and Rasayana Chikitsa .2. Cases not responding to the above 
management and require parasurgical 
procedures. 
3. Moderate to Severe cases of Katigraha  
with complications like scoliosis, sciatica 
etc.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA HOSPITALS 
AT INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL 
OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as Level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigations:  Nil
Treatment:  In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level 2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures can be performed. Full course 
Basti  Karma  like Yogabasti , Kalabasti  
and Karmabasti  can be done in selected  
cases.
Table 28.3: Medicines at level 3 for Katigraha
Drug Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
AdministrationDuration Anupana
Amruta Bhallataka 
AvalehaAvaleha 5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Milk
Eranda Paka Avaleha 5 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Milk
Trayodashanga Guggulu Vati 2-4 gm Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm 
water
Ekangaveer Rasa Vati 125-250 mg Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm 
water
KATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 187Table 28.4: Panchakarma  procedures at level 4 for Katigraha  
 Karma Choice of drugs Indications Remarks
Udwarthana Kolakulathadi Churna 
Yava, Kola, Kulatha;
Triphala Churna;Saama Katigraha  - associated 
recurrent respiratory infections, 
heaviness of back, spinal canal 
stenosis, and LBA in obesityMore useful in 
stiffness
Swedana Tapa, Ushma  – various 
herbal powders, steam 
generated with herbal 
leavesIn persistent pain without Pitta 
symptomsReduces associated 
muscle spasm 
immediately
Churna Pinda
SwedaKolakulathadi Yoga,  
Various Vata/ Kapha 
Hara powdersEarly stages of Katigraha Saama, 
KaphsamsrishtaKevala Vata, 
Pittanubandha contra 
indicated
Patrapinda
SwedaVarious leaves of Vata 
alleviating propertyUsually After Churnapinda 
Sweda,  directly on Nirama stagePittanubandha contra 
indicated
Jambeera Pinda 
SwedaCitrus fruit, turmeric 
and Vata  alleviating 
powdersSame as above + Localised 
oedema, Katigraha  of traumatic 
originPittanubandha contra 
indicated
Shashtika 
Pinda Sweda / 
Shashtika LepanaShashtika  rice, Bala 
decoction and milkIn Shuddha Vata  Katigraha , 
Wasting, Weakness, 
PittanubandhaKaphanubandha, Sama, 
Sheeta Anupashaya 
contra indicated
Kativasti Murivenna, 
Dhanwantaram Taila  etcIn severe pain, when pain 
aggravates on manipulation.
Virechana Plain or processed 
various Eranda Tail, 
Trivrita Lehya, Abhayadi 
Modaka, Ichabhedi Rasa 
etcDirectly in all constipated 
cases. Also done after 
Shodhanaga  Snehapana .
Always done as 
Mridusamshodhana  after various 
Swedana  procedures for 7 days 
or so. Nirgundi Swarasa is 
added in Eranda Taila 
for better results.
Anuvasana Basti Dhanwantara Taila, 
Sahacharadi Taila etc.In all  Katigraha in Vatapradhana 
stage especially with habitual 
constipations.Care for 
contraindications of 
Nasya
Nirooha Basti Erandamooladi , 
Madhutailika , Vaitarana  
Basti , Kshara Basti  
etc and various yoga 
explained in classics– Vaitarana Basti  is done 
in Ama  stages.
Agnikarma Shalaka, Ghrita, Taila etc Non responding cases to any 
approaches., severe pain, 
Kandaragata Shoola–
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same as Level 1
188 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESKATIGRAHA (LUMBAGO)
REFERENCES
7 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa sthana Vata Vyadhi 
Chikitsa 21/58-61, p. no. 572
8 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Arsho 
Rogadhikara 9/175-180 p. 323
9 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
Vatavyadhi Rogadhikara 26/172-175, p. 570
10 Sahasrayoga, Hindi translation, CCRAS, 
New Delhi, translated by Dr. D B Pandit 
Rao, edited by Dr. Vivekanand Pandey, 
Reprint edition 2011, Taila Prakarana, 51, 
p.no. 260-261
11 Sahasrayoga, Hindi translation, CCRAS, 
New Delhi, translated by Dr. D B Pandit 
Rao, edited by Dr. Vivekanand Pandey, 
Reprint edition 2011, Taila Prakaranam,  
124, p.no. 292
12 Yogaratnakara, Vaidya Lakshmipati 
Shastri, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Reprint 2013 
Vatavyadhi Chikitsa, 1-3. p.no. 5461 Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/88-89, p.no. 149
2 Sahasrayoga, Hindi translation, CCRAS, 
New Delhi, translated by Dr. D B Pandit 
Rao, edited by Dr. Vivekanand Pandey, 
Reprint edition 2011, Kasaya Prakaranam, 
549, p.no.112
3 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Kasa 
Rogadhikara 15/13, p. 439
4 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikara 29/152-157, p. 607
5 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhinandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikar 29/173-184, p. 610
6 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa sthana Vata Vyadhi 
Chikitsa 21/67-69, p.no. 573 
INTRODUCTION
Gridhrasi  is a Vatavyadhi  characterised by 
vitiation of Vata  afflicting the Kandara / Snayu 
of lower limbs. It is characterized by severe 
radiating pain starting from the low back 
to gluteal, posterior aspect of thigh, knee, 
calf and dorsum of the foot of either one 
or both sides of lower limbs. The condition 
makes raising of the leg difficult. All types of 
lumbar radicuolpathy also can be interpreted 
in terms of Gridhrasi . 
Case Definition:
Gridhrasi  is defined as Stambha  (stiffness), 
Ruk (pain), Toda  (pricking pain) in a radiating 
manner along with Spandana (tingling sensa -
tion) starting from Kati Pradesha (low back) 
to Prushtha  (back), Janu  (knee joints), Jangha  
(calf muscles) and Pada (dorso lateral aspect 
of feet) of either one side of the lower limb or 
may involve both lower limbs. This condition 
makes raising of the affected leg difficult. 
Types:
There are two clinical presentations as Kevala 
Vata and Kapha Vata. Association of Kapha 
produces additional symptoms like  Tandra  
(drowsiness), Gaurava  (heaviness) and 
Arochaka  (loss of taste).
Differential Diagnosis:
The condition should be differentiated from 
Katigraha  (Ankylosing spondylitis), Khanja, Pangu, Marmabhighata at any of the Kukundara 
and Nitamba Marma.
If the pain is localized to sacroiliac joint it 
may be diagnosed as Katigraha  a condition 
of ankylosing should be ruled out. Khanja  
and Pangu  are characterized with weakness 
of lower limbs due to loss of motor power. 
Khanja affects any one limb and Pangu  affects 
both. These conditions may not have any 
pain associated. Kukundara Marmabhighata 
is characterized by motor and sensory loss. 
Nitamba Maramabhighata  is characterised 
with wasting of lower limbs.
Line of Treatment:
• Nidana Parivarjana should be the 
first line of treatment.
• Shodhana Chikitsa – Virechana, Basti, 
Siravedha
• Shamana Chikitsa - Pachana, Snehana, 
Swedana including various types 
Pindasweda, Agnikarma, Balya
• External applications - Abhyanga, 
Lepa, Katibasti , Katipichu. 
• Rasayana Chikitsa for Asthi  and  
Vata
• Treatment according  to Doshik 
involvement
• General line of treatment prescribed 
for VatavyadhiGRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
190 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation
Investigations: ESR (Males 0-15 mm/h, 
Females – 0-20 mm/h) to rule out any 
inflammation
Treatment:  In level 1 also some minimal 
Panchakarma  procedures can be done in  
OPD.
• In Kapha  associated conditions, 
Rooksha Lepa like Nagaradi Lepa or Dashanga Lepa etc can be applied in 
the low back region 
• Katipichu or Katibasti with Murivenna, 
Dhanwataram Taila or Nirgundyadi 
Taila etc can be performed later.
• Mridu Samshodhana with Eranda 
Taila mixed with Nirgundi Swarasa 
can be given in patients with 
constipation. 
• Patient may be advised Matra 
Basti with Dhanwantaram Taila  in 
or Sahacharadi Taila  if found to be 
Kevala Vatika . 
Table 29.1: Medicines at level 1 for Gridhrasi
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Aswagandha Churna 3-5 gm Twice a day 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Rasna Churna 3-5 gm Twice a day 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Shunthi Churna 3-5 gm Twice day 1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Chopachini Churna 0.5-2 gm Twice a day 1-2 weeks Sugar – 3 gm
Eranda Beeja 
KsheerapakaKsheera 
PakaUse 5 seeds for 
preparationOnce a day 1-2 weeks-
Paarijaat Patra 
Swarasa1Swarasa 15 ml Empty stomach / 
twice a day 1-2 weeks-
Rasnasaptakam 
Kashaya2Kwatha 12 – 24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water and 
Nagara Churna
Sahacharadi 
KashayaKwatha 12 – 24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Maharasnadi 
Kashaya3Kwatha 12 – 24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm1-2 weeks Luke warm 
water
Yogaraja Guggulu4Vati 1-2 tab Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm water
GRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 191Trayodashanga 
Guggulu4Vati 1-2 tab Twice daily 1-2 weeks Warm water
Plain & various 
types of processed 
Eranda TailaTaila 15-50 ml Empty stomach 
-early morning or 
at bed timeAs per 
needHot water or 
milk
Bala Taila, Mahanarayana Taila, Nirgundyadi Taila, Sahachardi Taila, Vishagarbha Taila, Prasaranyadi 
Taila, Murivenna / Kuzhampu, Karpasasthydi Taila / Kuzhampu, Dhanwntaram Taila / Kuzhampu, etc. for 
Abhyanga  and Sweda
2. Chronic cases of Gridhrasi with full-
fledged symptoms or associated 
morbidities like foot drop, muscle 
wasting etc which require well planned 
In - Patient Panchakarma treatment .
3. Acute cases of Gridhrasi  with severe pain 
which require strict bed rest and traction 
massages etc.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.
Investigations:  Same as level 1, in addition
• X ray of the lumbo sacral spine 
Treatment:  In addition to the Shamana  
management mentioned in Level 1, some 
of the following drugs may be added 
as per the requirement and status of the 
patient. Intensive combination therapies 
of Rasaushadhi and Kashthoushadhi  (herbo-
mineral drugs) can also be used.Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s -
• Ahara : Advice light Vatanuloman  
diet like Shigru Shaka (drumstick), 
brinjal, Methi , Jeerak, Hingu, 
Saindhava, Yoosha,  Mamsarasa etc. 
may be given. 
• Vihara : Correct postures while 
sitting or lifting the weight, regular 
suitable Yogasana  and Abhyanga , 
hot water bath, fomentation, 
comfortable seats and bed should 
be used. Bowel and bladder urges 
should be attended timely. 
Dont’s -
• Ahara : Vata aggravating diet like 
pulses, peas, wafers, biscuits etc, 
cold food and cold drinks, stale 
food, excessive use of chilly.
• Vihara : Exposure to cold, heavy 
physical work, spongy mattresses 
and easy chairs.
Referral Criteria: 
1. Cases not responding to above line of 
Shamana management.
192 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
Table 29.2: Medicines at level 2 for Gridhrasi
Drug Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
AdministrationAnupana
Dashamoola Kwatha Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach / twice 
daily-
Guggulutiktakam Kashaya Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach / twice 
daily-
Dhanwantaram Kwatha Kwatha 12-24 ml Empty stomach / twice 
dailyDhanwantaram 
Vati 
Guggulutiktaka Ghrita5Ghrita 15-30 ml Before food on appetite 
/ once-twice a day-
Ashwagandharishta Arishta 10-20 ml After food / 
twice daily-
Balarishta6Arishta 10-20 ml After food / 
twice daily-
Sahachardi Taila / Bala 
Taila, Karpasasthyadi Taila, 
Dhanwntaram Taila 7Taila Can be used for Basti .
Vatagajankusha Rasa8Gutika 60-125 mg Twice daily Madhu
Vatavidhwamsa Rasa9Gutika 60-125 mg Twice daily Madhu
Ekangaveera Rasa Gutika 60-125 mg Twice daily Madhu
Dhanwantharm Taila (101)  
AvartiTaila 10-15 drops Once or twice a day for 
1-2 weeksSahachardi 
Kashaya
Sahacharadi Taila10 
(Madhyama Paka )Taila 10-15 drops Once or twice a day for 
1-2 weeksSahachardi 
Kashaya
• Basti may be given with 
Dhanwantarm Taila, Sahacharadi 
Taila etc and Madhutailika Basti or 
Erandamooladi Nirooha Basti may be 
done . 
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral Criteria: Cases not responding to 
above therapy• The patient may be subjected to 
local Abhyanga and Bashpa Sweda or 
traction massage with Murivenna, 
Sahacharadi Taila, Karpasasthydi  
Taila etc.
• Snigdha Churna Pinda Sweda, 
Patrapinda Sweda, and Jambeera 
Pinda Sweda and Shashtika Pinda 
Sweda may be tried.
GRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 193LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1for a fresh 
case reporting directly
Investigations:
• USG abdomen & pelvis– to rule 
out any visceral pathology or 
gynecological issues related to 
uterus and adnexa and PID, leading to low back pain and pain in lower 
limbs 
• USG – KUB – To rule out renal calculi 
and obstructive lower urinary tract 
symptoms.
• CT Scan– For better assessment of 
bony canal
• MRI Lumbosacral with whole spine 
screening.
Treatment: In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures can be performed. Full course 
Basti Karma  like Yogabasti , Kalabasti  and 
Karmabasti  can be done in selected cases.
Table 29.3: Panchakarma  Procedures at level 3 for Gridhrasi
Karma Choice of drugs Indications Remarks
Udwartana Kolakulathadi Churna; 
Yava, Kola, Kulattha; 
Triphala Churna;Kapha Vata Ghridhrasi  - 
associated with heaviness in 
affected limb, severe numbness, 
spinal canal stenosis and 
sciatica in obesityMore effective in 
Sama  conditions
Swedana Tapa, Ushma – Various 
herbal Churna s, steam 
generated with herbal 
leavesIn persistent pain without Pitta 
symptomsReduces associated 
muscle spasm 
immediately
Churnapinda
SwedaKolakulathadi Yoga,  
Various Vata / Kapha 
hara Churna sEarly stages of Gridhrasi Saama, 
KaphsamsrishtaKevala Vata, 
Pittanubandha contra 
indicated
Patrapinda
SwedaVarious leaves of Vata 
alleviating propertyUsually after Churnapinda 
Sweda,  directly on Nirama stagePittanubandha contra 
indicated
Jambeera Pinda 
SwedaCitrus fruit, turmeric 
and Vata  alleviating 
Churna sSame as above + localised 
oedemaPittanubandha contra 
indicated
Shashtika Pinda 
Sweda / Shashtika 
LepanaShashtika  rice, Bala 
decoction and milkLater stages of Gridhrasi, disuse 
atrophy, wasting, weakness, 
PittanubandhaKaphanubandha, 
Sama, Sheeta 
Anupashaya contra 
indicated
194 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESGRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
Katibasti Murivenna Taila 
Dhanwantaharam etcIn severe pain, when pain 
aggravates on manipulation.-
Virechana Plain or processed 
various Eranda Tail, 
Trivrita Lehya, Abhayadi 
Modaka, Ichabhedi Rasa 
etcDirectly in all constipated cases. 
Also done after Shodhanaga 
Snehapana .
Always done as Mridu 
Samshodhana  after various 
Swedana  procedures for 7 days. Nirgundi Swarasa 
is added in Eranda 
Taila for better 
results.
Anuvasana Basti Dhanwantara Taila, 
Sahacharadi Taila etc.In all Gridhrasi in Vata Pradhana 
stage.Care for contra-
indications of Nasya 
and oral Snehapana
Nirooha Basti Erandamooladi , 
Madhutailika , Vaitarana 
Basti , Kshara Basti 
etc and various Yoga  
explained in classicsNirama  stages of Gridhrasi , Vata 
Pradhana  stage. Vaitarana Basti  
should be done 
even in Ama  stages.
Rakta Mokshana - 
SiravedhaScalp set, intra-venous 
canula, tray, tourniquet 
etcNon responding cases to 
Snigdha Rooksa , Sheeta  or Ushna  
approaches, in acute and severe 
pains-
Agnikarma Shalaka, Ghrita, Taila etc Non responding cases to any 
approaches., severe pain, 
Kandaragata Shoola-
2. Bhallataka
3. Aswagandha
4. Guduchi
5. BalaPathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Rasayana :
1. Rasona Kalka
REFERENCES
1. Chakrapani, Chakradatta, Indradev 
Tripathi, Vaidya Prabha Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Bhawan, Varanasi, 
Reprint 2014, Chakradatta Vata Vyadhi 
Chikitsa 22/41, p.no. 136.2. Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/88-89, p.no. 149.
GRIDHRASI (SCIATICA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 1953. Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Orientalia 
Publication, Reprint 2011, Madhyama 
Khanda, 2/90-96, p.no. 149.
4. Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikara 29/152-157, p. 607.
5. Vagbhatta, Chikitsasthana Vata Vyadhi 
Chikitsa 21/58-61, Ashtanga Hrudaya 
Vidyotini Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Varanasi, p. 572.
6. Govind Das Sen, Vata Vyadhi Rogadhikara 
26/572-575, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, p. 570.7. Govind Das Sen, Vata Vyadhi Rogadhikara 
26/267-276, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, P. 542.
8. Govind Das Sen, Vata Vyadhi Rogadhikara 
26/114-118, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Siddhiprada Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi, p. 528.
9. Yogaratnakara, Vaidya Lakshmipati 
Shastri, Vidyotini Hindi Commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Reprint 2013 
Vatavyadhi Chikitsa, 1-3, p. 546.
10. Vagbhatta, Chikitsa Sthana Vata Vyadhi 
Chikitsa 21/67-69, Ashtanga Hrudaya 
Vidyotini Commentary, Chaukhambha 
Prakashana, Varanasi, p. No. 573.
INTRODUCTION
Pakshaghata (Pakshavadha / Ekanga Roga) is 
an important disease enlisted in Vatavyadhi  
context in . It is characterized by motor or 
sensory (or both) failure in any one side of the 
body. When it’s affected in all the four limbs 
it is called as Sarvanga Vata . When the clinical 
presentation is affected only one limb it is 
called Ekanga Vata . It may be associated with 
facial palsy ( Ardita ) and speech difficulties 
like aphasia ( Vaksanga ). Ayurveda identify 
the pathology of Pakshaghta  in relation with 
Cerebro Vascular Accident (CVA) and 
hence importance is given to Masthishkya  
(therapeutic applications on scalp). There 
are some limitations in Ayurveda for 
management of acute stroke in comparison 
to approaches like thrombolysis etc in 
modern medicine. Still in rural areas many 
Ayurvedic practitioners are successfully 
attending acute stroke cases also. In addition 
to this, Ayurveda definitely has a major role 
to play in management of residual paralysis 
as well as rehabilitation of patient and to 
prevent disease induced muscle atrophy and 
contractures. It also helps to improve muscle 
strength in patients where loss of motor 
power is not complete. Many of the associated 
features of hemiplegia like facial deviation, 
speech and language deficits, bowel bladder dysfunctions etc can be successfully managed 
along with improvement of motor functions. 
Ayurvedic classics recommend long term 
management in Pakshaghata  like 3-4 months. 
These include Snehana (internal & external),  
Swedana, Virechana, Basti, Nasya, Shirobasti 
etc. which are possible in secondary or 
tertiary care hospitals only. The primary 
level care may be limited to prompt diagnosis 
and timely reference to higher centers at 
early stages. They can also do follow up 
& rehabilitating care after discharge from 
secondary or territory care hospitals.
Case Definition 
Pakshghata  is defined as loss of motor functions 
or (and) sensations in any one side of the 
body caused by vitiated Vata affecting Sira 
and Snayu located in the Moordha  of contra 
lateral side. [Since facial palsy (other than 
Bell’s palsy) is a common accompaniment 
of paralysis; cases with Ardita are also 
considered here for the purpose of better 
understanding while management.]
Differential Diagnosis
In Ayurveda the diagnosis of Pakshaghata  
in terms of Cerebro Vascular Accident is 
made on the basis of various criteria like 
stages of the disease, extent of involvement PAKSHAGHATA 
(HEMIPLEGIA / STROKE / CEREBRO  
VASCULAR ACCIDENT)
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 197
as well as Doshic  predominance. Since all 
these are essential for classical Ayurvedic  
management, the diagnosis of Cerebro 
Vascular Accident is made with modern 
analogue as follows.
A. Post Stroke Residual Manifestations 
in Cerebro Vascular Disaeses
I. Classification According to Extent of 
Involvement
• Hemiplegia / Stroke / Cerebro 
Vascular Accident ( Pakshaghata )
• Hemiplegia with Facial palsy 
(Ardita )
Both the above diseases can be further 
divided into three stages according to  
onset.
II. Classification according to Stages of 
Disease
• TIA or RIND ( Ardita – Vega )
• Hemi paresis / Lacunar infarcts 
(Pakshasada )
• Completed stroke  (Pakshaghata )
III. Classification according to Doshic  pre-
dominance and prognosis
Further  Pakshaghata can be subdivided into 4 
major varieties as per prognosis explained in 
Ayurveda  classics. 
Late effects of CVA leading to Hemiplegia / 
Spastic paralysis / Disuse atrophy with 
symptoms predominantly of Vata – usually 
chronic in nature  (Shuddha Vata )
• Early effects of CVA leading to 
Hemiplegia / Flaccid paralysis / Localized swelling with symptoms 
predominantly of Kapha  – usually 
initial few weeks ( Kaphasamsrishta )
• Thalamic Stroke ( Pittasamsrishta )
• Degenerative brain lesion 
especially in elderly secondary to 
multiple lacunar infarcts ( Kshayaja  
Pakshaghata )
• Monoplegia secondary to CVA  
(Ekangavata )
• Quadriplegia – Brainstem Lesion 
(Sarvangaroga )
B.  Associated Morbidities in Stroke
Speech & language deficits – Aphasia / 
Dysphasia / Dysarthria, secondary to CVA– 
(Jihwasthambha /Vaksanga )
C.  Pre stroke manifestations of CVA 
• Not related with substance abuse 
(clouding of consciousness and 
confusion state secondary to CVA)-  
(Mada ) 
• Not related with substance abuse 
(stupor stage related to CVA)- 
(Murccha )
• Not related with substance abuse 
(coma related to brain injury 
secondary to CVA)- ( Sanyasa )
D.  Stroke due to traumatic brain  
injury
Paralysis due to traumatic brain injury  
(Shiromarmabhighataja Pakshaghata )
198 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
Diagnostic criteria and various presentation/phases of the disease are tabulated below:
Table 30.1: Differential diagnosis of Pakshaghat  with various presentations of the diseases
Diagnostic Term Essential Criteria Confirmatory Ayurvedic 
CriteriaRemarks
Pakshaghata Hemiplegia with 
symptoms of CVA 
(Either infarcts or 
haemorrhage)Motor loss (Akarmani)  +/- 
sensory impairment ( Vichetana ) 
on affected sideFacial deviation is 
not mandatory for 
diagnosis
Ardita Facial weakness on 
any side + above 
symptoms Facial deviation ( Vaktrardha 
Vakreekarana ) + Above 
symptomsFacial deviation 
is mandatory for 
diagnosis
Ekanga Vata  CVA leading to 
monoplegia Either one upper or lower limb 
(Bahu or Sakthi)  affectedOnly one limb 
affected
Sarvanga Vata CVA leading to 
quadriplegia Sarvakayashrita Pakshaghata All the four limbs 
affected
A. Classification According to Severity of Clinical Presentation
Ardita Vega TIA / RIND Vegavan Ardita Self limiting / 
reversible. But 
patient require 
prophylactic care 
for non recurrence
Pakshasada Hemi paresis Alpa Lakshanayukta Pakshaghata Pakshaghata  
with minimal 
symptoms
Pakshaghata Completed stroke Like Pakshaghata  in row 1 & 2
B. Prognostic Classification
Shuddha Vata
(Krichra Sadhyatama )Late effects of CVA 
- spastic paralysis / 
contractures / 
disuse atrophy - 
usually chronic in 
natureWith symptoms predominantly 
of Vata – Stabdha  /  Sankocha  / 
Sosha / Kaarshnya  /  Ushnakamitwa /
Kampa / Anaha / Shakritgraha /
Shoola etcUpashaya with  
Snigdha / Ushna / 
Brimhana  line of 
treatment
Kaphasamshrishta 
(Kriccha Sadhya )Early effects of CVA 
flaccid paralysis / 
localized swelling 
– usually initial few 
weeksWith symptoms predominantly 
of Kapha – Gourava/ Shopha/ 
Sheeta/ Supta/ ShlathangataUpashaya with  
Rooksha / Ushna / 
Langhana  line of 
treatment
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 199Pittasamsrishta
(Kricchra Sadhya )Thalamic stroke – 
Sensory strokeWith symptoms predominantly 
of Pitta –Krodha, Daha, Sweda, 
Sparshasahishnuta etc  Upashaya with  
Sheeta / Sthambhana  
line of treatment
Kshayaja Pakshaghata
(Asadhya )Degenerative brain 
lesion especially in 
elderly secondary 
to multiple lacunar 
infarctsHemiplegia / paresis with 
features of generalized Sosha/ 
Smritikshaya / Nidranasha/ 
OjakshayaVatahara  palliative 
care may help 
in minimizing 
problems 
C. Associated Morbidities in Stroke
Jihvasthambha / 
Vaksanga Sensory or 
motor Aphasia 
/ Dysphasia /
Dysarthria 
secondary to CVAVaksanga / Vakgraha – difficulty 
in speechMay respond 
to treatment of 
Jihvasthambha
Mada Clouding of 
consciousness 
and confusion / 
delirium secondary 
to CVAPralapa / Cheshta / Krodha / 
Alpavak / Dhyana / Asambadha 
VakNot exclusively 
due to any 
substance abuse
Murcchha Stupor stage related 
to CVAMurcchha/ Tama Pravesha / visual 
hallucinationsNot exclusively 
due to any 
substance abuse
Sanyasa Coma related 
to brain injury 
secondary to CVAKashthibhuto  Mritopama - total 
unresponsivenessNot exclusively 
due to any 
substance abuse
D. Stroke due to traumatic brain Injury
Shiro 
Marmabhighataja 
PakshaghataParalysis secondary 
to traumatic brain 
injury Shiromarmabhighata Lakshana
Line of management: 
General line of management includes Snehana, 
Swedana and Virechana . Further Aasthapana, 
Anuvasana, Nasya, Upanaha, Maastishkya etc 
are also exclusive line of management of 
Pakshaghata. In Ardita  associated conditions Shrotra Tarpana, Akshi Tarpana, Ksheeradhooma 
etc are also incorporated. All these treatments 
can be done in secondary or tertiary 
care hospitals. In primary care settings, 
prophylactic care as well as rehabilitative 
care can be offered.
200 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis : Two types of cases may 
be presented 
1. Acute stroke cases
2. Residual paralysis cases.
Residual paralysis cases can be easily 
diagnosed on the basis of history and clinical 
presentation of the patient with respective 
stages described under differential diagnosis. 
In acute stroke cases clinical diagnosis is 
made on the basis of following symptoms
1. Acute or gradual onset of loss of sensory 
and / or motor functions on one side of 
the body
2. Changes in vision, gait or ability to speak 
or understand
3. Experience of sudden severe headache.
4. Altered consciousness
5. History of Hypertension, Dyslipideamia, 
and smoking are risk factors
The patients with above features should be 
suspected for Pakshaghata  due to CVA 
Patient examination – Basic neurological 
examinations may be done immediately. 
Blood pressure should be checked and noted. 
Airway, breathing and circulation (ABC) may 
be checked and assured. The patient may 
be immediately sent to higher centers with 
diagnostic imaging facilities and intensive 
care units. 
In remotest places, when reference is not 
possible treatment may be initiated with 
proper informed written consent from 
relatives.Investigations: Patients of chronic residual 
paralysis and patients on prophylactic 
medications after TIA or RIND attending 
the remotest Level 1 should be regularly 
monitored for control on blood pressure, 
lipid profile and blood glucose levels. Acute 
stroke patients attending remotest Level 1 
Clinics where immediate reference is not 
possible and treatment initiated should be 
closely monitored with regular checking of 
BP and other vital signs. 
Treatment:  The treatment may be divided 
into three varieties of patients.
1. Acute stroke patients attending remotest 
Level 1 where reference to higher centre 
is not possible.
2. Patients with chronic residual palsy.
3. Patients with prophylactic treatment 
after a history of TIA or RIND
Treatment may be initiated to acute stroke 
patients attending remotest Level 1 where 
reference to higher centre is not possible 
only after proper informed consent. The 
probabilities and consequences of the 
condition should be well informed to the 
relatives of the patient. 
• Patient may be given Pradhamana 
Nasya  with 2-3 pinches of Vacha 
Churna and Rudraksha Churna  
at 30 minutes interval for 3 to 4 
instillations ( Pradhamana Nasya  
may be avoided in intra cranial 
hemorrhages suspected cases). 
• In suspected cases of intracranial 
hemorrhages possible measures 
from Urdhwga Raktapitta Chikitsa  
may be adopted except purgation 
as Pratiloma Shodhana . The patient 
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 201may be given Pichu  over vertex with 
drugs having cooling properties like 
Kachuradi Churna mixed in  Eranda 
Taila . Kalka Nasya  with Sthambhana  
property like Vasa  or Durva  may be 
attempted. • Eventually measures should be 
taken to transfer the patient to 
higher centers. 
Shamana medicines:  Shamana  medications 
also should be planned according to the 
clinical varieties described above. 
Table 30.2: Medicines at level 1 for Pakshaghat
Drugs Dosage Dose Time of 
administrationDuration Remarks / 
Anupana
Acute stroke - Remotest Level 1 - reference to higher centre is not possible
Drakshadi Kwatha1Decoction 12-24 ml Twice or thrice Few hours Preferably as 
Phanta
Suvarnamuktadi 
GutikaVati 1-2 Vati Twice or thrice Few hours With Drakshadi 
Kwath a
Dhanwantaram 
GutikaVati 2-4 Vati Twice or thrice Few hours Along with Jeera  
water
Patients with chronic residual palsy
Aswagandha 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Bala Churna Churna 3-5 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Rasna (Alpinia 
galangal) ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Brahmi Churna Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Shankhapushpi 
ChurnaChurna 5-2 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Chopchini Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water/ 
honey/ milk 
Guggulu Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm water
Haritaki Churna 5-10 gm Bed time 3-4 months Hot water
Ashtavargam 
Kashaya2Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm3-4 months –
Dhanadanayanadi 
KashayaDecoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm3-4 months –
Gandharvahastadi 
Kashaya3Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm3-4 months Saindhava  and 
Guda
202 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
Maharasnadi 
Kashaya4Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm3-4 months –
Dashmula Kwatha5Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach / 
6 am & 6 pm3-4 months –
Eranda Taila Oil 15-30 ml Once at bed 
time or empty 
stomach early 
morningDuring 
constipationLuke warm 
water / 
warm milk/ 
Shatapushpa  
Siddha  water
Yogaraja Guggulu6Vati 1-2 Vati Twice daily 3-4 months With warm 
water 
All patients may be given external applications like Karpasasthyadi Taila, Dhanwantaram Taila, 
Kottamchukkadi Taila, Bala Taila or Nirgundi Taila  as per availability and advised self massage, slight 
fomentation and suitable  physical exercises. 
Patients with prophylactic treatment after a history of TIA or RIND
(Treatment strategies of Hypertension and dyslipidaemia can also adopted)
Rasona Pinda Liquid 5-20 ml Once or twice 3-4 months As plane / 
sesame oil
Guggulu Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily 3-4 months Warm Water
Rasonadi Kashaya Decoction 12-24 ml Empty stomach 
/6 am & 6pm3-4 months
and balanced food. Khichadi  made 
with rice and green gram added 
with pure little amount of clarified 
ghee, cream removed milk is good. 
Non Constipating diet as fiber rich 
food like leafy vegetables, green 
salads, fruits, barley etc should be 
encouraged . Vata  alleviating food 
articles prepared with ghee or any 
suitable  oil, Udada (black gram), 
Shigru Shaka (drumstick), brinjal 
etc may be given. Patola, Rasona, 
Dadima, Parushaka, Badara, Draksha, 
may be advised by the patient. Shali, 
Shashtik, Kulattha,  wheat products 
are suitable. Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education):
Please also refer diet contributing to hyper -
tension and dyslipidaemia and diabetes.
Since the disease is caused by diet and 
activities contributing to obesity, vitiation of 
Vata  Rakta , specific advices should be given 
to avoid all these. The whole life style of 
the patient should be changed especially in 
prophylactic cases of TIA or RIND to prevent 
recurrences.
Do’s–
• Ahara : The patient should be 
provided easily digesting, nutritional 
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 203• Vihara : Regular exercise along with 
Abhyanga, Mardana, Avagahana or 
Samvahana  should be regularly used. 
Timely sleeping, attending natural 
urges and maintaining calmness 
of mind are very important. It  is 
always ideal to use hot water for 
drinking as well as bathing. 
Dont’s ( Apathya )
• Ahara:  Use of food items like 
Chanaka (bengal gram), Kalaya 
(lathyrus or pea) , Kordusha (millets) , 
Shyamaka, Rajmasha, Shitambu 
(cold water) should be avoided. 
Vata  contributing diet as dry food,  
excessive usage of pulses like green 
peas, black beans, lentils, yellow 
gram etc . pungent / astringent food 
like red chilies, excessive use of all 
spices, diet with low water content 
like wafers, biscuits etc should be 
discouraged. Diet contributing 
to vitiation of blood as  spicy and 
salty food like pickle, papad, soya 
sauces, chili sauces,  immediate 
consumption of cold after hot diet 
etc. should be avoided. Repeated 
and continuous usage of excess 
oily deep fried foods, sugar / 
carbohydrate rich diet like cold 
drinks, sweets, dry fruits etc,  milk 
products like butter, cheese, paneer, 
meat products  should be strictly 
avoided.  Awareness should be 
generated regarding unhealthy 
dietary habits like skipping 
meals ( Anashana ), late eating 
habits ( Pramitashana ), over eating without letting proper digestion 
(Adhyashana ), incompatible foods 
(Virudhashana ). All diet leading 
to habitual constipation and 
indigestion should be restricted. 
• Vihara : Chinta (excessive thinking) , 
Prajagarana (improper sleep at 
night) , Vega Vidharana (suppression 
of natural urges , Shrama (excess 
hard work) should be avoided. 
Sedentary habits, day sleep, night 
awakening, habit of holding of 
urges, smoking & alcoholism 
substance abuse and exposure 
to hot and cold intermittently 
are to be avoided.  Psychological 
factors contributing to worsening 
of the condition like exposure to 
persistent grief and fear, recurrent 
aggressiveness, over worrying, 
anxiety etc should be successfully 
managed through counseling. 
Referral criteria: 
• All acute stroke patients should 
be immediately referred to 
higher centers after quick initial 
assessment. 
• Those patients with residual 
paralysis not responding to the 
above management and getting 
worsening may require in - patient 
management for better recovery 
and may be referred to level 2. 
• Those patients on prophylactic 
medication is not under control 
for risk factors like blood pressure 
and fasting lipid profile and those 
patients show recurrent TIA 
204 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
should be referred to higher centers 
for detailed investigations and 
management. 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1  
Patient examination: For acute stroke cases, 
quick neurological and cardiovascular 
assessment should be done and then 
immediately send for imaging studies. For 
chronic residual palsy patients detailed 
neurological examination should be carried 
out to assess the degree of disability.
Investigations: 
• For all suspected acute stroke cases 
CT Brain is mandatory to exclude 
intracranial bleed.
• Later follow up MRI Brain may be 
done for detailed assessment.
• MR angiogram may be performed 
in cases of TIA or RIND symptoms 
in carotid territory.
• X-ray cervical spine along with 
lying and standing blood pressure 
is helpful in TIA in vertebra-basilar 
territory.
• All patients should be serially 
monitored for fluctuations in blood 
pressure. 
• Routine tests like CBC, ESR, blood 
glucose, lipid profiles, urea and 
protein, ECG and a chest X-ray are 
to be performed. • In young stroke patients ANA 
screening may be done to exclude 
anti phospholipid antibodies. 
• In all residual paralysis patient’s 
systematic and regular check up for 
blood pressure, lipid profiles and 
blood glucose may be done.
Treatment: As Pakshaghata  is a disease which 
requires long term in patient department 
follow up for better recovery, secondary and 
tertiary care hospitals are more important. 
In addition to the management mentioned in 
Level 1, the following drugs may be added as 
per the requirement and status of the patient. 
Rasaushadhi  (Herbo-mineral drugs) or herbal 
drugs containing potent toxic contents can 
also be used at this level. Patient may be kept 
under observation while prescribing these 
kinds of medicines. 
All acute stroke patients after CT scan may 
be informed about all possible treatment 
strategies and those who opt for intensive 
management including thrombolytic 
therapy etc under a modern physician may 
be sent for the same. Other patients willing 
for continuing Ayurveda management can 
be treated with informed consent. 
In acute stroke patients Pradhamana Nasya, 
Kalka Nasya, Pichu Dharana  etc may be 
done as described in Level 1 by an experi -
enced Ayurvedic physician. Shirolepa  with 
Purana Dhatri, Musta and Panchagandha 
Churna  pasted in buttermilk or continuous 
Shirodhara with  Dhanwantaram Taila  etc, are 
also performed. Brihatvata  Chintamani  Rasa  
1-2 Vatilets well triturated in ghee are given 
in empty stomach in alternate two hours in 
acute stroke which yield better outcome. 
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 205The general line of management in Ayurveda 
for completed stroke patients with residual 
palsy are detailed below.
Line of Management
• Shamana – Amapachana, Deepana, 
Rookshana, Snehana, Vatahara, 
Brimhana
• Shodhana - Langhana, Snehana, 
Swedana, Virechana, Anuvasana Basti, 
Nirooha Basti, Nasya, Masthishkya
Specific Line of Management
• Pakshaghata - Snehana, Swedana, 
Snehayuktavirechana + Mastishkya, 
Upanaha
• Ardita    -     Navana, Moordhnitaila, 
Karnapoorana, Akshi TarpanaIn patient Panchakarma  treatment:
All possible Panchakrma  treatments with 
medicines and indications are detailed in 
Level 3. All feasible and available treatment 
strategies can be incorporated in level 2 
also. Here Shamana  therapy is explained  
in detail. 
Shamana : (Internal and external medications)
Note: As the treatment approaches overlap between sep -
arate conditions (explained in the context of introduction 
and differential diagnosis) in different stages and Doshic  
permutations, the medicines / procedures enlisted here 
are indicated generally. Specific indications are highlighted 
where ever necessary.
Table 30.3: Medicines at level 2 for Pakshaghat
Drug Dosage 
formDose Time of 
AdministrationAnupana Specific indication
Single Drugs
Aswagandha Churna Churna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkBrimhana,  
Anabolic, 
Adaptogenic, 
Neurogenerative
Bala (Sida cordifolia) 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkBalya,  
Neurogenerative
Rasna (Alpinia 
galangal) ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkVatahara, 
Vedanasthapana
Kapikacchu (Mucuna 
pruriens) ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkMedhya, Brimhana, 
Kampavatahara
206 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
Shatavari (Asparagus 
racemosus) ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkPitta samsrishtavata
Devadaru (Cedrus 
deodara) ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
Milk–
Shunthi (Ginger) 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
Milk–
Rasona Pinda Churna 5-20 ml Once or twice Sesame oil –
Jatamansi (Nardostachys 
jatamamsi ) ChurnaChurna 5-2 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkMedhya, Avasadaka
Brahmi (Bacopa 
monnieri) 
ChurnaChurna 5-2 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkMedhya
Shankhupushpi 
(Mussaendra frondosa)Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
Honey/ 
MilkMedhya
Chopchini (Smilax 
china)Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily Warm 
Water/ 
HoneyShoolahara
Guggulu (Commiphora 
mukul )Churna 5-2 gm Twice daily Warm 
WaterMedasvrita vata
Combinations / Preparations
A. Early Stages of Residual Stroke ( Kaphanubandha )
Rasonadi Kwatha Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice daily In empty 
stomachVata direction 
reversed, 
(Urdhwavata )
Sahacharadi Kashaya Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice daily Empty 
stomach, 
Taila 05 mlParaplegia, When 
lower limbs are 
more affected
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 207Shaddharanam 
Churnam7Churna 5-10 
gmTwice daily With Warm 
waterSaamavatahara
Yogaraja Guggulu8Vati 1-2 
VatiTwice daily Warm water 
/KwathaVatahara
Sahacharadi Taila9Oil l0-15 
mlOnce or Twice 
dailyBefore food 
on appetite, 
with 
Kashaya–
Karpasasthyadi Taila10Oil l0-15 
mlOnce or Twice 
dailyBefore food 
on appetite, 
with 
Kashaya–
Plain  or various  
processed  Eranda 
(Ricinus communis ) 
TailaOil 10-30 
mlAlong 
with above 
decoctions, 
milk or as  
plainEarly 
morning or 
at bed timeVatanulomana, 
Pakshaghata specific
B. Early Stages of Residual Stroke ( Pittanubandha )
Brahmidrakshadi 
KwathaDecoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty 
stomachPittanubandha Vata, 
Sarvanga Daha, Mada, 
Moorcha
Drakshadi Kwatha11Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty 
stomach as 
Phanta or HimaPittanubandha Vata, 
Moorcha
Mansyadi Kwatha Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty 
stomachManodosha, Stress , Mada
Suvarna muktadi Gutika Vati 1-2 
VatiTwice 
dailyWith Coconut 
waterGiddiness, BPPV
Thiktaka/ Mahathiktaka 
/ Kalyanakam Ghrita12Ghee 10- 30 
mlOnce 
or 
twice 
daily– –
Brahmi(Bacopa 
monnieri) Ghrita13Ghee 15-30 
gmTwice 
dailyBefore food Nooropic
Avipatikara Churna14Churna 5-15 
gmTwice 
dailyBefore food, 
with honeyPittasaraka
208 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
C. Later Stages of Stroke on Chronicity and Vata Predominance
Gugguluthiktakam 
KashayaDecoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach In Chronicity, 
Deeper Dhatu  
involvement
Prasaranyadi Kashaya Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach, 
then milk porridgeMonoplegia, 
Upper limb 
specific
Shundibaladi Kwatha Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach Supti , (Parasthesia)
Maharasnadi Kwatha15Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach, 
Shunthi Churna/ 
Pippali Churna/ 
Yogaraja Guggulu/
Eranda TailaPakshaghata, 
Brimhana
Vidaryadi Kwatha Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach Shosha Pradhana 
Nayopayam Kwatha Decoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach Prana Udana 
Anulomana,
Dhanwantharam 
KwathaDecoction 12-24 
mlTwice 
dailyIn empty stomach 
with Dhanwantharam 
VatiletShiromarmabhighata
Rasna Dashamooladi 
GhritamGhee 15-30 
mlOnce 
or 
Twice 
dailyBefore food on 
appetite, Warm 
waterBrimhana, 
Shirakampa
Gugguluthikthaka 
Ghrita16Ghee 15-30 
mlOnce 
or 
Twice 
dailyBefore food on 
appetite
Aswagandharishta17Liquid 30 ml Twice 
dailyAfter food Nootropic, 
Revitaliser
Balarishta18Liquid 30 ml Twice 
dailyAfter food Nootropic, 
Revitaliser
Saraswatharishta19Liquid 10-20 
mlTwice 
dailyAfter food Nootropic, 
Memory booster, 
Improve speech
Dhanwantharam Gutika Vati 1-2 
VatiTwice 
dailyWith Jeera water Vatanulomana
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 209Ksheerabala1 / 
Dhanwantharam /
Maharajaprasrini Taila 
7-101 avarthiOil 10-15 
dropsOnce 
or 
Twice 
dailyBefore food on 
appetite, with 
KashayaNadi  Balyam , 
Sukshma  Sneham
Karpasasthydi Taila/ 
Sahacharadi Taila/ 
Dhanwantahra Taila/ 
Mahanarayana TailaOil l0-15 
mlOnce 
or 
Twice 
dailyBefore food on 
appetite, warm 
waterVata  and Vata  
Kapha  Pradhana
Karpasasthydi 
Taila / Kuzhampu, 
Dhanwantaram20 Taila/ 
Kuzhampu, Sahacharadi 
taila / Kuzhampu, 
Prabhanjanam Taila / 
Kuzhamb uOil For Head / External application Taila  for head and 
ext. application. 
Kuzhambu  for ext. 
application only
Ksheerabla Taila / Bala 
Taila21Oil For Head and External application
Kottamchukkadi Taila Oil For External Application In Sheetavridhi  – 
Kapha  Vata
Pinda Taila Oil For External Application In Ushnavriddhi  – 
Pitta  Vata
Nirgundi Taila Oil For External Application
Vishamushti Taila Oil For External Application
Rasa Preparations Commonly Practiced in Pakshaghata
Brihatvatachintamani22Churna 60-125 mg Once daily With ghee
Vatagajankusharasa Churna 60-125 mg Twice daily Combination 
with 
Kashtoushdhis
Vatavidhwamsarasa23Churna 60-125 mg Twice daily Combination 
with 
KashtoushadhiAcute conditions 
of Pakshaghata , 
Painful limbs
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria:
• Patients not responding to above 
mentioned management and show signs of severe complications, 
patients of severe chronicity who 
require complete Panchakarma  
therapy and Rasayana Chikitsa  
for better recovery are to be  
referred. 
210 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA HOSPITALS 
AT INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL 
OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation:  Same as level 2Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2, complete Panchakarma  
procedures ( Samanya  and Vishesh  Chikitsa  of 
Pakshaghata ) for chronic, complicated and 
non responding patients are detailed here 
under Shodhana  therapy.
Shodhana : (This include the list of Karma  in 
chronological order with complete details 
of procedures along with choice of drugs, 
indication and contra indications) 
Table 30.4: Panchakarma procedures at level 3 for Pakshaghat
Karma Choice of drugs Indications Contraindications
Udwarthana Kolakulathadi Churna (Ca.
Su);
Yava, Kola, Kulatha;
Triphala churna;Kaphasamsrishta, 
Dyslipidaemia, Obesity, 
Flaccid stage of Stroke, 
Early stage of strokeAbsolute Vata  
type, Skin Allergy, 
Wasting, In obstinate 
constipation & 
Sleeplessness
Dhanyamla Dhara Dhanyamla Saama/ Kapha samsrishta 
stage in Pakshaghata, 
Pittanubandha, Painful 
limbs–
Agnilepa Drugs having Ushna 
Veerya  like Maricha, Tulasi, 
Shunthi,  etcIn acute stage of 
Pakshaghata,  for initial 7 
days, to improve from 
flaccidityPittaanubandha 
Abhyanga Various oils explained for 
external applicationVata Pradhana,  
Generalized body ache, 
Wasting, contractures, 
SpasticIn Kapha  vitiation, 
Indigestion, 
Suspected Ama
Swedana Tapa, Ushma, Upanaha and 
Drava Sweda – Various 
articlesPakshaghata  with Vata 
Kapha symptoms like 
Parasthesia, pricking pain, 
convulsions, oedema, 
stiffness etcPitta predominant/ 
associated stage
Churnapinda
SwedaKolakulathadi Yoga,  Various 
Vata/ Kapha-hara Churna sEarly stages of 
Pakshaghata, Sama, 
KaphsamsrishtaKeavala Vata, 
Pittanubandha
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 211Patra Pinda
SwedaVarious leaves of Vata 
alleviating propertyUsually After Churna 
Pinda Sweda,  directly on 
Nirama stagePittanubandha
Jambheera Pinda 
SwedaCitrus fruit, turmeric and 
Vata  alleviating Churna sSame as above + Localised 
oedemaPittanubandha
Shashtika Pinda 
Sweda / Shashtika 
LepanaShashtika  rice, Bala 
decoction and milkLater stages of Pakshaghata, 
Disuse atrophy, Wasting, 
Weakness, PittanubandhaKaphanubandha, 
Saama, Sheeta 
Anupashaya
Virechana Snehapana (Indukantha 
Ghrita, Vidaryadi Ghrita, 
Karpasasthyadi Taila, 
Sahacharadi Taila, 
Ksheerabala Taila etc) 3-7 
days
Swedana (Bashpa Sweda)  
3 days
Virechana (Snigdha Virecha, 
Plain or processed castor 
oil, Mishraka Sneha, Eranda 
Taila with milk )
Samsarjana Karma (3-7 days)Essentially in all types of 
Pakshaghata . 
Snehapana  only when 
Doshik  predominance in 
Pakshaghata  is kevala Vata 
and NirupasthambhaActive Gastric / 
Peptic Ulcer, IHD, 
Ulcerative colitis, 
Acute abdomen, if 
patient physically 
weak
Anulomana Eranda Taila, Eranda bhrishta 
Hareetaki, Senna, Hridya 
Virechana etcVatika  type associated 
with chronic Vibandha–
Anuvasana Pippalyadi Anuvasana 
Taila, Dhanwantahram 
Taila, Sahacharadi Taila, 
Karpasasthyadi Taila etcVatika  type associated 
with chronic Vibandha,  
conventionally prior to 
Nirooha Agnimaandhya, Rakta 
Arsha
Nirooha Basti – 
Yoga /Kala/ Karma 
patternErandamooladi Basti, 
Madhutailika, Siddha Basti, 
Rajayapana BastiEssentially in all types 
of Pakshaghata,  Classical 
Shodhana  for VataContraindications of 
Nirooha
Ksheera Dhooma Balakwatha, Ksheera When associated with 
facial palsy–
Navana / Nasya Anutaila/ Ksheerabala 
(Avarthi), Dhanwantahara 
(Avarthi), Shandbindhu TailaVatika  stage of Pakshaghata,  
Arditha, Mada, MoorchaContraindications of 
Nasya
Pradhamana 
NasyaNasika Choorna, Vacha, 
KatphalaKapha  associated 
Pakshagahta,  Sanyasa , in 
unresponsive patients/ 
brainstem lesionsSuspected IC 
hemorrhage
212 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
Avapeedaka Nasya Surasa, Lashuna (Garlic ) etc 
as SwarasaKapha  associated 
Pakshagahta , brainstem 
lesionsSuspected IC 
hemorrhage
As Taila shirodhara Custom practice in almost 
all typesof Pakshghata  and 
ArditaSaama, 
Kaphapradhana, 
Jwaranubandha
Moordhni Taila 
– (Shiroabhyanga 
Shiropichu 
Shirodhara, 
Shirovasti)Various Taila explained for 
application on headIn Later stages of 
Pakshaghata , as a finishing 
treatment in Pakshaghata,  
Insomnia, stress Vata 
Pradhana  stageChronic / Recurrent 
sinusitis associated 
with head ache 
and Shiroabhyanga 
Anupashaya
Takradhara Medicated Takra  with 
Purana dhatri , Mustha  and 
Panchagandha  ChurnaPaittika  and Vata Paittika  
association in Pakshaghata, 
Mada, Moorcha  as 
prophylacticDo
Upanaha Upanaha Churna, Salwana Wasting and painful 
conditionsSkin allergy
Rasnadi Pichu Rasnadi Churna with  Eranda 
TailaKaphaja  type HTN –
Kacchuradi Pichu Kacchuradi Churna with  
Eranda TailaVatapaittika type –
Rasayana:  List of Rasayana drugs which 
may be used for either for prevention or 
management of the disease
1. Lashuna (garlic)  Churna
2. Shankhupushpi (Mussaendra frondosa ) 
Churna
3. Vacha (Acorus calamus ) Churna
4. Mandookaparni (Centella asiatica ) Swarasa 
(juice )5. Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia ) Swarasa
6. Siddhmakaradwaja Vati
7. Chitraka (Plumbago indica ) Churna
8. Bhallataka Rasayana Avaleha
9. Shatavari (Crotalaria verrucosa) Rasa
10. Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri ) Churna
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
PAKSHAGHATA 
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2131 Vagbhata, Ashtanga hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Chikitsasthana Jwara 
Chikitsa 1/55, p. no. 394.
2 Sahasrayoga, CCRAS, New Delhi, translated 
by Dr. D B Pandit rao, edited by vivekanand 
pandey, Reprint edition 2011, kasaya 
prakaranam, 105, p.no. 22
3 Sahasra Yoga, CCRAS, New Delhi, 
translated by Dr. D B Pandit rao, edited by 
vivekanand pandey, Reprint edition 2011, 
Kasaya Prakaranam, 105, p.no. 22
4 Sahasrayoga, CCRAS, New Delhi, translated 
by Dr. D B Pandit rao, edited by vivekanand 
pandey, Reprint edition 2011, Kasaya 
Prakaranam, 398, p.no. 80
5 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi nandan mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Kasa 
Rogadhikara 15/13, p. 439
6 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
Commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikara 29/152-157, p. 607
7 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Ambikadatta 
shastri, Ayurveda tatva dipika Hindi 
commentary, Chaukhambha Sanskrit 
Sansthan, Reprimt edition 2005, Varanasi, 
Vatavyadhi Chikitsasthana 4/3, p. no. 25
8 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, Amavata 
Rogadhikara 29/152-157, p. 6079 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, chikitsa sthanaa vata vyadhi 
chikitsa 21/67-69, p. no. 573
10 Sahasrayoga, CCRAS, New Delhi, 
translated by Dr. D B Pandit rao, edited by 
vivekanand pandey, Reprint edition 2011, 
taila prakaranam, 22, p.no. 252
11 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, chikitsa sthana jwara 
chikitsa 1/55, p. no. 394.
12 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, Uttara sthana 6/26-39,  
p. no. 644.
13 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha prakashana, Edition Reprint 
2008, Varanasi, uttara sthana 6/23-25,  
p. no. 643.
14 Govind Das Sen, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
Amlapitta Rogadhikara 56/24-28, p. 903
15 Sharangdhara, Sharangdhara Samhita, 
Shailja Srivastava, Jivanprada Hindi 
Commentary, Chaukhambha orientalia 
publication, reprint 2011, Madhyama 
khanda, 2/90-96, p.no. 149 
16 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, REFERENCES
214 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPAKSHAGHATA 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition 
Reprint 2008, Varanasi, chikitsa sthana 
21, p. no. 573.
17 Govind Das Sen, Murchha Rogadhikara 
21/16-22, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
p. 492 
18 Govind Das Sen, Vatavyadhi  Rogadhi -
kara 26/572-575, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti 
Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, p. 570
19 Govind Das Sen, Rasayana Adhikara 
73/178-192, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbharti Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
p. 1122.
20 Vaidya Yoga Ratnavali Taila Prakarana
21 Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hrudaya, Atridev 
Gupt, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashana, Edition 
Reprint 2008, Varanasi, Chikitsa Sthana 
21, p. no. 573. 
22 Govind Das Sen, Vatavyadhi Rogadhi -
kara 26/141-144, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Siddhi Nandan Mishra, Siddhiprada 
commentary, Chaukhambha Surbhar -
ti Prakashan, Edition 2011, Varanasi, 
p. 530.
23 Yogaratnakara, Vaidya Lakshmipati 
Shastri, Vidyotini Hindi commentary, 
Chaukhambha Prakashan, Reprint 2013 
Vatavyadhi Chikitsa, 1-3, p.no. 546
INTRODUCTION
Sandhigata Vata is the type of pathogenesis 
involved in various disease conditions affect -
ing the joints, e.g. osteoarthritis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, etc. and causing pain in affected 
joints.1 
Case Definition:
Painful condition of joints involving single 
or multiple joints restricting the movements, 
with or without swelling and crepitus ( Sandhi 
Sphutana ). 
Differential Diagnosis:-
• Amavata• Vatarakta
• Katigraha
• Gridhrasi
• Ansashoola
• Krostrukshirsha
•	Ankylosing spondylitis
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation 
Investigations:  Nothing Specific
Treatment:  See table 31.1SANDHIGATA VATA (OSTEOARTHRITIS)
Table 31.1: Medicines at level 1 for Sandhivata
Drug Dosage form Dosage Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Ashwagandha 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily 2-3 months Milk
Shuddha 
Vishtinduka Churna 250 mg Twice daily 2 weeks Water
Pippalimoola 
ChurnaChurna 500 mg Twice daily 1 month Water
Sunthi-Haritaki 
ChurnaChurna 3-5 gm Twice daily 1 month Water
Rasnadi Kwatha2Decoction 30-40 ml Empty stomach
twice daily15 days to 
one month-
Dashamula Kwatha Decoction 30-40 ml Empty stomach
twice daily15 days to 
one month-
216 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSANDHIGATA VATA (OSTEOARTHRITIS)
Rasna-Erandadi 
Kwatha3Decoction 30-40 ml Empty stomach
twice daily15 days to 
one month-
Yogaraja Guggulu4Vati 1-2 Vati 
(500 mg)After food
Thrice a day15 days to 
one monthRasna-
saptaka
Kwatha  / 
warm 
water
Simhanada
GugguluVati 1-2 Vati 
(500 mg)After meal thrice 
a day15 days to 
one MonthWarm 
water
and ice cream, Continuously fasting 
or taking limited food for a very 
long duration.
•	Vihara : Inadequate sleep or fre -
quent changes in sleep pattern, 
suppression of natural urge espe -
cially of hunger, bowel and urine 
and emotions, Excessive physical 
strain like swimming, climbing , 
walking, running, sports which 
involve straining of joints like in 
badminton, football etc., all such 
occupation which involves exces -
sive movement of joints, resulting 
in joint injuries.
Referral Criteria: Refer to Level 2
1. Cases that are not responding to above 
management and develop complications 
or severe painful condition.
2. Need further investigations.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis:  The diagnosis is made on 
the basis of criteria mentioned in Level-1 for 
fresh cases. The case referred from Level-1 or Local:
Abhyanga : On the affected joints with warm 
medicated oils like Bala Taila, Sahachara 
Taila, Vishagarbha Taila, Nirgundi Taila, 
Mahanarayana Taila , Brihat Saindhavadi Taila, 
Dhanvantara Taila, Kottamchukadi Taila.
Swedana: With hot water bag, Nadi Sveda , 
Baluka  Pottali Sweda , Nirgundi Patra Pinda 
Sveda, Parisheka.
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style): 
Do’s ( Pathya )
•	Ahara : Purana Shali, green gram, 
milk, grape, Luke warm water, 
Paraval, drum stick, garlic.
•	Vihara : Massage, warm water 
bath, posture correction, follow the 
Dinacharya  and Rutucharya .
Don’ts:
•	Ahara : Dried vegetables, lentils, 
sprouts, raw vegetables and 
salads, refined foods such as white 
flour, excessive use of leafy green 
vegetables, mushrooms, peas, 
Excessive intake of pungent food, 
cold drinks, beverages, chilled food 
SANDHIGATA VATA (OSTEOARTHRITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 217fresh case must be evaluated thoroughly for 
any complication.
Investigations:
•	Haemogram
•	Serum uric acid
•	Serum calcium•	RA Factor
•	S. alkaline phosphatase
•	X-Ray of affected joint
•	CRP
Treatment: See table 31.2.
Table 31.2: Medicines at level 2 for Sandhivata
Drug Dosage 
formDose Time Duration Anupana
Maha Yogaraja Guggulu5Vati 500 mg-
1 gmThrice a 
day15 days to 
one monthRasnadi Kwatha, 
Triphala Kwatha
Kaishora Guggulu6Vati 500 mg-
1 gmThrice a 
day15 days to 
one monthDashamula Kwatha , 
Luke warm water
Vatavidhvamsa Rasa7Vati 125-250 
mgTwice 
daily15 days to 
one monthWarm water/ 
honey 
Narsimha
Churna8Churna 1.5 gm After meal
twice daily15days to 
one monthWarm Water
Dashamool- arishta Arista 15-30 ml Twice 
dailyOne month Nil
Ashwagandh- arista Arista 15-30 ml Twice 
dailyOne month Nil
Amrita Bhallataka Avaleha 5-10 gm Once daily One month With milk
Local management:
• Upanaha with leaves of Eranda, 
Nirgundi, Arka, Chincha etc. on 
affected joints .
• Lepa with Dashanga Lepa, Lepaguti, 
Gandhabiroja Lepa  etc.
• Janubasti / Greevabasti / Katibasti: 
Mahanarayana Taila9, Masha Taila, 
Prabhanjana Vimardana Taila,10 
Vishagarbha Taila,11 Bala Taila12 etc• Abhyanga / Sthanika Mridu 
Snehana: Medicated oil such 
as Mahanarayana Taila,13 Masha 
Taila, Kshirbala Taila, Ashwagandha 
Balalakshadi Taila
• Swedana  (medicated fomentation):
1. Ekanga (local fomentation) or 
Sarvanga Sweda  (whole body 
fomentation) with decoction of 
Nirgundi, Dashamula, Eranda, 
Balamula , etc
218 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSANDHIGATA VATA (OSTEOARTHRITIS)
2. Patra Pinda Sweda:  local fomen -
tation by Pottali made from 
leaves of Nirgundi, Eranda  etc.
Pathya -apathya  (diet and life style): Same 
as Level 1
Referral Criteria: The cases those are not 
responding to above mentioned therapy 
and suffering from advanced stages of 
disease like severe effusion, contractures, 
osteoporosis or deformities or Patients with 
some other uncontrolled conditions like 
obesity, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus 
and hypertension etc. 
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly.Investigations:
1. Investigations mentioned in level 2 may 
be repeated if necessary. 
2. BMD
Treatment:  In addition to the treatment 
prescribed in level-1 and 2, following 
procedures can be done.
1. Basti Karma: Tiktaksheera Basti, Yapana 
Basti &Yoga Basti
2. Agni karma (cauterization): Agni Karma  
on the affected joints 
3. Virechana: obese patients may be given  
Virechana
4. Siravedha
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style):- Same 
as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Agnivesha, Charaka, Charaka Samhita,  
Chikitsa Sthana  28/37, edited by Vaidya 
Yadavaji Trikamji Acharya Chaukhamba 
Surbharati Prakashana, Varanasi 2011. 
pg.no.618
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:193
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:1974 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:215
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:212
6 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali, 
Vatarakta Chikitsa Adhikar  27/98-108, 
In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Chaukhamba 
Prakashan, Varanasi, 2009 
SANDHIGATA VATA (OSTEOARTHRITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2197 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:722
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:326
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:436
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:406
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:444
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:413
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:436
INTRODUCTION
Vatarakta  is a disease of vitiated Vata 
and Rakta . Most of the collagen vascular 
disorders / connective tissue disorders come 
under the broad umbrella of Vatarakta . 
Case Definition:
Often it is presented clinically in the form of 
painful joints, parasthesia, eruption, swelling, 
redness etc. Vatarakta  is of two types – Uttana  
when pathology is confined to Twak  and 
Mamsa  and Gambhira  when deeper tissues 
and organs are involved in the pathogenesis. 
Differential diagnosis:
1. Amavata 
2. Kushtha
3. Visarpa
4. ArbudaLine of Treatment
External application, Abhyanga , Parisheka  and 
Upanaha  are advised in Uttana  Vatarakta  and 
Virechana, Asthapan  and Snehapan  are given 
in Gambhira  Vatarakta . 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  On the basis of 
history and clinical presentation patient 
can be diagnosed provisionally as case of  
Vatarakta . 
Investigations: Nothing specific
Treatment : In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Vatarakta , 
along with diet restriction, two or more of 
following drugs may be given:VATARAKTA (GOUT)
Table 32.1: Medicines at level 1 for Vatarakta
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Guduchi Swarasa / 
Churna10-20 ml / 
3-5 gmBefore meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks Warm water
Kokilaksham
KashayamDecoction 20-40 ml Before meal/  
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Rasna Erandadi
Kwatha1Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal/  
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Laghu
Manjisthadi
KwathaDecoction 20-40 ml Before meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks -
Kaishora
Guggulu2Vati 1-2 Vati  
(500 mg)After meal/
thrice a day2-3 weeks Warm Water
VATARAKTA (GOUT)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 221
Punarnava
Guggulu3Vati 1-2 Vati  
(500 mg)After meal/
thrice a day2-3 weeks Warm Water
Simhanada
Guggulu4Vati 1-2 Vati  
(500 mg)After meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks Warm water
Nimbadi
Churna5Churna 1-3 gm After meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks Guduchi 
Kwatha, 
Warm water
Triphala
KwathaDecoction 20-40ml Before meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks Madhu
Amrutadi 
Kwatha6Decoction 20-40ml Before meal/  
thrice a day2-3 weeks
Pinda Taila7, Taila Q.S. Once daily 1 month External 
application
Ksheerabala 
Taila8Taila Q.S. Once daily 1 month External 
application
• Vihara : Suppression of natural 
urge especially of hunger, bowel 
and urine and emotions, day 
sleep, excessive physical activity, 
exposure to sun.
Referral criteria:
• If patient is not responding to 
treatment.
• Need further investigations
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation:
• Complete hemogram
• CRP
• S. Uric Acid, RA factor
• X-ray of affected jointsPathya -apathya  (diet and life style):
Do’s ( Pathya )
• Ahara : Green gram, barley, Syamaka  
(Sava ), Raktashali , wheat, goat milk, 
cow milk. Tanduliya , Kushmanda, 
Draksha, Parval , Eranda Taila, butter , 
bottle gourd, drumstick, Punarnava , 
Vastuka , bitter gourd, asafoetida, 
black pepper, rock salt. Soup of 
Arhar, Moong, Chanak, Masur  and 
Makushtha . 
• Vihara : nothing specific
Don’ts ( Apathya ):
• Ahara : Black gram, horse gram, 
Nishpava, Kalaya, Kshara, Anupa 
Mamsa , refined foods such as white 
flour, peas, spinach, potatoes, butter 
milk, curd, tomato, fermented 
foods, red meat, cold beverages, 
liquor, cold water.
222 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESVATARAKTA (GOUT)
Treatment: Treatment given in Level 1 may be continued. 
Table 32.2: Medicines at level 2 for Vatarakta
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Brhat manjistadi Kwatha9Decoction 20-40 ml Before meal 
twice daily2-3 weeks -
Amrutadi
GugguluVati 1-2 Vati 
(500 mg)After meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm water
Panchtikta
Guggulu Ghrita10Ghee 12 gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Milk, warm 
water
Sukumara Ghrita11Ghee 12 gm Before meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Milk, warm 
water
Madhu-yashtyadi Tailam12
Oil6 to 10 
dropsBefore meal/
twice daily2-3 weeks Warm Water
Griha dhumadi13 Lepa Churna Q.S. Once daily 15 days External 
application
Nagaradi Lepa Churna Q.S. Once daily 15 days External 
application
Dashamoola Ksheera Kshira  Paka Q.S. Once daily 15 days External 
application
Sahacharadi Taila14/Pinda 
Taila15 / Dhanvantaram 
Taila16/ Ksheerabala Taila17Taila Q.S. Once daily 15 days External 
application
*Note: Brhat Manjistadi Kwatha, Panchatikta Guggulu Ghrita and Amruta Guggulu in Tridoshaja Vatarakta, Kokilaksham 
Kashayam in Raktadhikya Vatarakta are advisable
Investigation: ANA screening.
Treatment: 
a. Virechana Karma
b. Rakta Mokshana – Jalaukavacharana (Leech 
therapy) on painful and swollen joint.
c. Basti  – 
1. Matra Basti  – Brihatsaindhavadi taila18- 
in painful condition, Amavastha , 
Madhuyastyadi  Taila , Kshirabala Taila
2. Kshira Basti  
3. Yapana Basti  - Guduchyadi Yapana, 
Madhutailika BastiPathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1
Referral criteria: If patient is not responding 
to treatment of Level 1 and 2 and develops 
complication.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA HOSPITALS  
AT INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL 
OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 for a 
fresh case reporting directly
VATARAKTA (GOUT)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 223Rasayana : See table 32.3
Table 32.3: Rasayana s can be used at level 3 for Vatarakta
 Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDuration Anupana
Shilajatu Rasayana Churna 500 mg – 1 gm Early morning 
empty stomach2-3 months Guduchi 
Kwatha
Pippali Kshirapaka 3 Pippali  in 
increasing dose 
upto 33 Pippali  
and reverseEarly morning 
empty stomach22 days Milk
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
7 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:404
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:378
9 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:189
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:270
11 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:301
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:4341 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:197
2 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 1, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:207
3 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part 2, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:223
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:321
6 Sri Govinda Dasa, Bhaishajya Ratnavali 
Vataraktadhikara 27/26, In: Ambikadutta 
Shastri, Chaukhamba Prakashan Varanasi, 
2009
224 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESVATARAKTA (GOUT)
13 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:485
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:456
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:40416 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:394
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:378
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India, Part I, Ed. 2nd, Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, Department 
of I.S.M. & H., New Delhi, 2003:428
Netragata Roga

INTRODUCTION
Abhishyanda  is considered as the root cause 
of almost all the eye diseases.1 Abhishyanda  is 
one among the seventeen types of Sarvagata 
Netra Rogas  explained in the classics. It is 
of four types viz. Vataja , Pittaja , Kaphaja  
and Raktaja . The word Abhishyanda  means 
“Ativriddhi ” and “ Sravana ”. Abhi - going 
towards / great / excessive, Syanda – tremor 
/ to shaking. Other meanings of Abhishyanda  
are oozing / flowing / trickling. Ayurvedic 
features of Abhishyanda  as per classics are 
mentioned below: 
1. Vataja Abhishyanda : Nistodana - pricking 
sensation, Stambhana - stiffness, 
Romaharsha - horripilation, Sangharsa 
- foreign body sensation, Parushya - 
roughness, Siro-abhitapa - headache, 
Vishuskabhava - dryness, Shishiraasruta 
- cold or watery discharge.
2. Pittaja Abhishyanda : Daha - burning 
sensation, Prapaka - severe 
Inflammation, Shishira Abinanda - relief 
by cold measures, Dhumayana - feeling of 
Smokiness, Baspasamuchhraya  – sensation 
of steam, Usnasruta  – Warm lacrimation, 
Pitakanetrata - yellowish discoloration of 
the eye.
3. Kaphaja Abhishyanda : Usnaabhinanda 
- relief by warm measures, Guruta –
heaviness, Kandu – itching, Upadeha 
- stickiness due to increased exudates, 
Sitata - whiteness, Atisaityam - excessive coldness, Sravomuhuh – frequency of 
discharge is increased, Picchila  – slimy 
discharge.
4. Raktaja Abhishyanda : Tamra Asruta - 
coppery tears, Lohita Netrata - blood red 
discoloration of eye, Samanatat Atilohita 
Rajyah : Generalized congestion.
Case Definition:
Abhishyanda  is defined as a disease in which 
there is Sroto Syandana (secretions) in all 
channels of head and neck. Inflammation 
of the conjunctiva is classically defined as 
conjunctival hyperaemia associated with 
discharge which may be watery, mucoid, 
mucopurulent, purulent.
Differential Diagnosis:
1. Adhimantha : In Adhimantha,  excessive 
churning type of pain as if eye is being 
extracted from its socket. 
2. Sashopha Akshipaka : In Sashopha Akshipaka  
inflammation is more prominent feature 
in comparison to Abhishyanda .
3. Sirotpata : If the eye is marked with 
painless or painful coppery red vascular 
streaks, which later on totally disappear 
the disease is known as Sirotpata .
4. Siraharsha : The advance stage of the 
Sirotpata  due to the neglecting leads 
to Siraharsha,  in which there will be 
difficulty in visual perception.ABHISHYANDA  (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
228 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
Table 33.1: Differentiating features of common types of conjunctivitis: 
Signs Bacterial Viral Allergic Chlamydia
Congestion Marked Moderate Mild to 
moderateModerate
Chemosis ++ +/- ++ +/-
Subconjunctival 
hemorrhage+/- + - -
Discharge Purulent or 
mucopurulentWatery Ropy / watery Mucopurulent
Papillae +/- - ++ +/-
Follicles - + - ++
Pseudo membrane +/- +/- - -
Pannus - - - +
Pre-auricular lymph node + ++ - +/-
Investigation: Though much can be 
diagnosed based on the clinical signs and 
symptoms, torch light examination of 
affected eye may be done.
Treatment:  In the initial stage when the 
patient is having mild features of Abhishyanda,  
following drugs may be given. However, in 
the initial five days, fasting in the form of 
light diet may be advised.Differential Diagnosis of Conjunctivitis:
• Scleritis,
• Acute Iridocyclitis,
• Acute Congestive Glaucoma, 
• Trachoma,
• Bacterial / Viral / Allergic / 
Chlamydia Conjunctivitis.
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: Diagnosis can be done 
on the basis of clinical presentation 
Table 33.2: Medicines at level 1 for Abhishyanda
 Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Aam Pachana Vati Vati 2 Vati After Meal / 
twice a dayHot 
Water7 days
Triphala Guggulu2Vati 2 Vati After Meal / 
twice a dayHot 
Water7 days
ABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 229Vasakadi Kwatha3Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Brihat Vasakadi Kwatha4Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Patoladi Kwatha5Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Phalatrikadi Kwatha6Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Vasanimbadi Kwatha7Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Manjishthadi Kwatha8Kwatha 20 ml Before meal / 
twice a dayWater 7 days
Drugs for local application:
Opthacare eye drops Liquid 1 drop Thrice a day - 7 days
Nayanamruta 
Netrabindu9Liquid 1 drop Thrice day - 7 days
I tone eye drops Liquid 1 drop Twice day - 7 days
Netra Pariseka :
Triphala Yavkuta, 10 
Yashtimadhu, Vasa, 
Lodhra, Tankana Churna 2 gm + 1 gm + 1 
gm + 1 gm + 500 
mg respectivelyThrice day - 7days
of Jeevanti  (Leptadenia reticulata ), 
Sunishannaka  (Marsilea minuta ), 
Tanduleeya (Amaranthus aspera ), 
Vastuka  (Chenopodium album ), 
Karkotaka  ( Momordica dioica ), 
Karavellaka  (Momordia charantia ), 
Shigru  (Moringa oleifera ), Agastya  
(Sesbania grandiflorum ), Punarnava  
(Boerrhavia diffusa ), brinjal, carrot, 
spinach, cow ghee, cow milk, one 
year old preserved Ghrita , meat of 
birds and wild animals, Amalaki 
(Embelica officinalis ), Draksha  (Vitis 
vinifera ) dried and fresh both, Diet education and preventive 
measures: 
Do’s -
• Ahara :11,12,13 Regular intake of 
Yava  (Hordeum vulgare ), Godhuma 
(Triticum sativum  Linn), Lohita 
Shali (Oryza sativa  Linn), Mudga  
(Phaseolus radiatus ), Shatavari  
(Asparagus racemosus ), Patola  
(Trichosanthes dioica ), Kustumburu  
(Coriander sativum ), Surana  (Phallus 
campanulatus ), unripe banana 
(Musa spp. ), cooked vegetables 
230 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
Dadim ( Punica granatum ), Almond, 
Saindhava  (rock salt), sugar candy 
(Sita), honey ( Kshaudra ) and 
Amalaki Payasa , Shatavari Payasa  
are beneficial for the eyes. 
• Vihara : Withdrawing the mind 
from objects of senses, Padabhyanga  
(Foot massage), Shiroabhyanga  
(scalp massage with oil), Netra 
Prakshalana (eye wash), Mukhalepa  
(face pack with herbal medicines), 
wearing head gear, always 
wearing shoes are also beneficial 
for the eyes.
Dont’s -
• Ahara : Excessive and regular 
intake of horse gram and black 
gram pulses, Virudha Dhanya  
(sprouts), chillies and spices, sour 
and fermented foods like pickles, 
idali, dosa etc, heavy foods like 
cheese, paneer, deep fried items 
etc, Junk foods and fast foods, 
Dadhi  (curd), Matsya (fish), meat 
of animals belonging to damp 
areas ( Anoopa Mamsa ), Phanita , 
Pinyaka  (oil cake) Aranala (sour 
gruel), excess water intake, excess 
alcohol intake, betel leaf chewing 
(Tambula ) 
• Vihara : Life style factors like 
anger, grief, excessive coitus; 
suppression of natural urges 
like defecation, micturition, lacrimation, hunger, thirst etc.; 
looking at minute objects, excessive 
weeping, excessive vomiting and 
suppression of vomiting, daytime 
sleep and awakening at night, 
shift duties, working on computer 
for continuous and longer 
duration and watching television 
for long time, sudden changes 
of temperatures, exposure to 
frequent change of hot and cold 
temperatures, exposure to dust 
and fumes, excessive sunlight 
exposure and smoking.
Referral Criteria: Patient not responding 
to the above treatment and needs further 
investigations to find out the cause.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1; for fresh 
cases reporting directly.
Investigation: same as level 1 and in  
addition 
1. Vision test
2. Slit lamp examination
3. Fluorescein and Rose Bengal Staining
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient.
ABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 231Table 33.3: Medicines at level 2 for Abhishyanda
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of administration Duration Anupana
Sahacharadi Ghrita14Ghrita 10 ml Before meal / once a 
day evening ( Nishi Kala )7 days Milk
Tiktaka Ghrita15Ghrita 10 ml Before meal / once a 
day evening ( Nishi Kala )7 days Milk
Sutashekhara Rasa16Churna 250 mg Twice a day 7 days Milk / warm 
water
Kaphaketu Rasa17Churna 125-250 
mgTwice a day 7 Days Honey
Vatavidhvamsana 
Rasa18Churna 125-250 
mgTwice a day 7 Days Honey
• Fluorescein and Rose Bengal 
Staining
Treatment:
• In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level -2,
• Treatment can be done according to 
predomince of Dosha.
a. Chikitsa Sutra of Vataja 
Abhishyanda19 – The patient 
should be treated with old ghee 
(clarified butter). The part of 
the forehead adjoining the eye 
and not the eye itself should be 
fomented and local venesection 
resorted to. Then after having 
effected full purging with the 
help of a Sneha -Basti  (oleaginous 
enema), such measures as 
Tarpana , Putapaka , fumigation, 
Aschyotana  (sprinklings), Nasya  Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style): Same 
as level 1.
Referral criteria: Refer to level 3
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
2. Patients with severe conjunctivitis, 
infection spread on cornea and blurring 
of vision.
3. Patient is indicated for Panchakarma  
therapy.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS.
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level-1
Investigation: 
• Culture and Sensitivity test
232 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
(snuffing), Sneha Parisheka  
(oily washings), Shirobasti  or 
washing with any decoction 
prepared with the drugs of the 
Vayu -subduing group. 
b. Chikitsa Sutra of Pitaja 
Abhishyanda20– Bloodletting 
and purgatives, eye-washes 
and Vidalaka , Nasya (snuffing) 
and Anjana  (collyrium).
c. Chikitsa Sutra of Kaphaja 
Abhishyanda21– In acute 
stage it should be treated by 
bloodletting by venesection 
or other means, by the 
employment of fomentation, 
Avapida Nasya, Anjana , fumigation, washes, Vidalaka, 
Kavala  (gargles).
d. Chikitsa Sutra of Raktaja 
Abhishyanda22 – The patient 
should be first anointed 
and lubricated with old and 
matured clarified butter, 
venesection should then be 
resorted to. Vidalaka , washes, 
snuffs, inhalation of medicated 
smokes, eye drops, collyrium, 
Tarpana  (soothing measures), 
Putapaka  should be prescribed.
• If needed Panchakarma  procedures 
indicated for Conjunctivitis can be 
performed.
Table 33.4: Shodhana Chikitsa  and other Kriyakalpas  at level 3 for Abhishyanda
Shodhana 
KarmaVataja 
AbhishyandaPittaja 
AbhishyandaKaphaja Abhishyanda Raktaja 
Abhishyanda
Nasya Oil processed 
with Shalaparni, 
milk and drugs 
of Madhura Gana  
are beneficial.23Ghee processed 
with Pittahara  
drugs Shali, Durva, 
Daruharidra
Sariva, Kashmari  and 
sugarcane juice.24Avapida Nasya with 
Trikatu , Katphala etc 
Kapha
Shamaka  drugs.25Ghritamanda 
processed with 
breast milk 
and Madhuka, 
Nilotapala.26
Ashcyotana
 Goat’s milk 
processed with  
leaves, root and 
bark of  Eranda27
Goat milk 
processed 
with Haridra, 
Devadaru  and 
Saindhava28 Goat’s milk 
processed with 
Lodhra , Yastimadhu  
and ghee. 29Decoction of Sunthi, 
Triphala, Nimba, Vasa, 
Lodhra30Triphala, Lodhra, 
Yasti, Sharkara, 
Musta  with cold 
water31
Shigrupallav Rasa with Honey32
Triphala decoction33
ABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 233Parisheka Drugs used in Aschyotana can be used for Parisheka in respective Doshas.
Anjana Pashupata Yoga34Pashupata Yoga35Fruits of Shigru and 
Karanja ,
fruits and flowers of 
Brihati36Equal parts of 
Patala, Arjuna, 
Sriparni, 
Bilwa, Dhataki, 
Manjishtha, 
Amalaki pasted 
with honey.37
Siramoksha Snehana, Swedana 
followed by 
bloodletting 
with Shrunga38Snehana, Swedana 
followed by 
Siravyadhana39Snehana, Swedana 
followed by 
Bloodletting by 
Alabu  or through 
Siravyadha40Bloodletting by 
Leech.41
Dhoomapan Snaihika 
Dhumapana with 
Agaru, Guggulu 
and Ghee etc42-Dhoomapana with 
Trikatu, Haridra, 
Sarshapa, Nimba, 
Guggalu etc Kaphahara 
Dravya43
Virechana Snehapana : plain Gau Ghrita , Mahatriphala Ghrita44 / Mahatiktaka Ghrita45 / Patola 
Ghrita46
As per the status of the patient,
Virechana: Mridu Virechana / Koshtha Shuddhi with Avipattikara Churna47 5-10 gm with 
Drakhshadi Kashaya48 (50-100 ml).
Tilwaka Ghrita (5-10 gm) with Tilwaka Kashaya (50-100 ml ) may be done for early few 
days of the treatment49
REFERENCES
Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, Varanasi, 
2007.
4. Vrindamadhava or Siddhayoga, 61/67, 
edited and translated by Premvati Tiwari, 
Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, Varanasi, 
2007.
5. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:17), 2000.
6. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 1. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary 1/11,12 edited by Vaidya 
Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, Chaukhamba 
Surabharati Prakashan Varanasi, 
Uttaratantra, 2010. pg. 603.
2. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5:5), 2000.
3. Vrindamadhava or Siddhayoga, 61/65, 
edited and translated by Premvati Tiwari, 
234 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
Welfare, Govt. of India, 2000, Part II (4:16), 
2000.
7. Vrindamadhava or Siddhayoga, 61/71.72 
edited and translated by Premvati Tiwari, 
Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, Varanasi, 
2007.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:24), 2000.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (11:1), 2000.
10. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:9), 2000.
11. Yogaratnakara, Vidyotini Hindi 
Commentary by Vaidya Lakshmipati 
Shastri; Netrarogadhikara; Chaukhambha 
Prakashan Vranasi Edition 2008.
12. Sushruta. Sushruta Samhita Dalhana Comm. 
- Nibandhasamgraha, Uttaratantra 17/50-
51; Chaukhambha Orientalia Varanasi, 
2005, 8th Edition, 2010.
13. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha 
- Sasilekha Comm. Indu, Uttartantra, 56; 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
14. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra 19/17; 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:13), 2000.
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:52),  
2000.17. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:8), 2000.
18. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:45), 2000.
19. ShriDalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 9/3-4; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
20. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra10/3; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
21. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 11/2-3; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
22. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/2-3; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
23. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 9/10-11 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
24. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra 10/5; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
ABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 235Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
25. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 11/3-5, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi; 2008.
26. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/40; 
Krishna Das Academy, Varanasi, 2000.
27. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra, 9/13-14; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
28. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita, Uttarakhanda; 13/8, Tra. Himsagar 
Chandra Murty, Chaukhamba Surabharati 
series. Varanasi: 2007.
29. Sharangdharacharya, Uttarakhanda; 
13/8Tra. Himsagar Chandra Murty, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati series. Varanasi: 
2007.
30. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, : Uttaratantra 16/17, edited by 
Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhambha Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint -2011.
31. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita, Uttarakhanda13/9, Tra. Himsagar 
Chandra Murty, Chaukhamba Surabharati 
series. Varansi; 2007.
32. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra,16/9, Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
33. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita, Uttarakhanda 13/9, Tra. Himsagar 
Chandra Murty, Chaukhamba Surabharati 
series. Varansi; 2007.
34. Vagabhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with 
the commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, Uttarasthana 16/25-27, edited 
by Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhambha Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint -2011.
35. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, : Uttarasthana16/25-27, edited 
by Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhamba Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint – 2011.
36. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta Samhita 
with Nibandhasamgraha commentary, 
Uttaratantra11/6-9, edited by Vaidya Jadavji 
Trikamji Acharya Chaukhamba Surabharati 
Prakashan Varanasi, 2008.
37. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/11-12 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
38. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, Uttaratantra 19/10 edited by 
Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhamba Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint -2011.
39. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
236 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESABHISHYANDA (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
commentary, Uttaratantra 10/3 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya year 
2008, Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
40. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 19/30, edited 
by VaidyaJadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
41. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/8, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
42. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha commentary Indu, Uttartantra, 
19/11 Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
43. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 11/3-5 edited by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
44. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:35), 2000.
45. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:34), 2000.
46. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:28), 2000.
47. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:2), 2000.
48. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:13), 2000.
49. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu, Uttartantra, 19/10 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
INTRODUCTION
Adhimantha1 is a disease characterized by 
intense feeling in the eye, wherein eye seems 
to be being extracted out and churned up 
along with the involvement of the half of 
the head in association with specific features 
of the particular Dosha involved. On the 
basis of symptoms it can be correlated with 
Glaucoma. 
Glaucoma is not a single disease process 
but a group of disorders characterized by a 
progressive optic neuropathy resulting in a 
characteristic appearance of the optic disc and 
a specific pattern of irreversible visual field 
defects that are associated frequently but not 
invariably with raised intraocular pressure. 
There are so many types of glaucoma out of 
which Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) 
and Primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) 
are most common type. On the basis of signs 
& symptoms, POAG can be correlated with 
Vataja & Kaphaja Adhimantha & PACG can be 
correlated with Raktaja & Pittaja Adhimantha.
Ayurvedic classification:
1. Vataja Adhimantha: Utpatyataiva- 
feeling like eye ball extraction , Mathyate 
Aranivat (feeling like eyeball is churned 
up by Arani – a churner for making 
buttermilk out of curd), Sangharsa 
(Foreign body sensation), Todana & 
Nirbheda (pricking sensation or splitting 
pain) , Mamsasamrabdha (swelling of muscular tissue) , Avilam (blurring of 
vision) , Kunchana Asphotana (feeling 
of constriction & bursting) , Adhmana 
(raised tension) , Vepathu (twitching), 
Sirsoardham Vyathana (headache on one 
side). 
2. Pittaja Adhimantha: Raktarajicitam 
(congestion), Sravi (discharges), Daha  
(burning sensation) , Yakrat Pindopmam  
(eye discoloration to brownish red) , 
Ksharanaktamiva Kshatam (burning 
sensation like  salt applied on wound),  
Prapaka  (severe inflammation), Sa-
swedana  (perspiration), Pita Darsanam  
(yellowish appearance of all objects), 
Murccha  (unconscious), Sirodaha  
(burning sensation in the head).
3. Kaphaja Adhimantha : Sopha (swelling), 
Srava (discharge), Kandu (itching), Sitata  
(whiteness), Guruta (heaviness), Picchila  
(slimy), Dushika  (muddy discharge), 
Harshana  (horripilation), Rupam Pashyati 
Dukhena  (seeing is difficult or painful), 
Pamshupurnam-iva-avilam  (haziness of 
cornea), Nasadhmana  (blockage in the 
nose), Shirodukha (headache).
4. Raktaja Adhimantha: Bandhujiva 
Pratikasham (eye looks like Bandhujiva 
flower/bloody red eye), Tamra Ashruta 
(coppery tears), Sparshanaakshamam  
(tenderness), Raktasrava  (bleeding), 
Nistoda  (pricking type pain), 
Pashyatiagninibha disha (visualizes flames 
in all directions).ADHIMANTHA  (GLAUCOMA)
238 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
Case Definition:
Excessive churning type of pain in which the 
patient feels that his eye is being extracted 
from its socket which can also lead to 
blindness in addition to pain.2
Differential diagnosis:
1. Abhishyanda  – In Abhishyanda  discharge 
is more in comparison to Adhimantha .
2. Sashopha Akshipaka – In Sashopha Akshipaka  
inflammation is more prominent feature 
in comparison to Adhimantha.
3. Sirotpata  - If the eye is marked with 
painless or painful coppery red vascular 
streaks, which later on totally disappears, 
the disease is known as Sirotpata .
4. Siraharsha  - The advance stage of Sirotpata  
due to the neglect leads to Siraharsha  in 
which there will be difficulty in visual 
perception.
Differential diagnosis of Glaucoma:
• Acute iridocyclitis
• Posterior uveitis
• Congenital optic disc anomalies
• Acute conjunctivitis
• Ocular hypertension
• Physiological cupping of optic disc
• Secondary glaucoma
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYUVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC / PHC 
Clinical Diagnosis : On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation patient can be 
suspected provisionally as a fresh case of Glaucoma and should be referred for 
management to hospital or center at level 2.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 
Investigation : Though much can be 
diagnosed based on the clinical signs and 
symptoms, Laboratory investigations help 
the clinician to confirm the diagnosis and 
rule out other conditions:
• Complete Blood Count
• Torch light examination
• Vision test
• Slit lamp examination
• Tonometry for IOP evaluation 
(normal 10-20 mm of Hg)
• Direct and indirect Ophthalmoscope 
examination
• Confrontation / Automated 
Perimetry
• Fundus Photography
Treatment:
POAG: (Vataja & Kaphaja Adhimantha )
• Mootrala  (diuretics) drugs 
for reducing IOP such as 
Punarnavashtaka Kwatha, Gokshuradi 
Guggulu, Chandraprabha Vati orally 
etc.
• Ashchyotana  (mentioned below) 
• Chakshushya & Rasayana drugs 
(mentioned below)
ADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 239• Oral administration of Sahacharadi 
Ghrita mentioned specially for 
Adhimantha3 
PACG: (Pittaja & Raktaja Adhimantha )
• Mootrala  (diuretics), Chakshushya & 
Rasayana drugs (mentioned below)
• Rakta Prasadaka drugs in Raktaja 
Adhimantha as Brihat Kushmanda 
Avaleha4 &, Shatavari Paka5• Ashchyotana  with Goat’s milk used 
as eye drops to relieve pain.6
• Other oral or local drugs can be used 
according to signs & symptoms of 
patient.
In the initial stage when the patient is having 
mild (two or more) features of Adhimantha 
following drugs may be given:
Table 34.1: Medicines at level 2 for Adhimantha
Drugs Dosage 
formDose Time of 
administrationDurations Anupana
Aampachana Vati Vati 2 Vati After meal /  
twice a day7 days Hot Water
Gokshuradi7 / 
Triphala Guggulu8Vati 2-3 Vati After meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Hot Water
Pathyadi Kwatha9Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Guda
Vasakadi Kwatha10Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Water
Brihat Vasakadi Kwatha11Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Water
Patoladi Kwatha12Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Water
Phalatrikadi Kwatha13Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Water
Sahacharadi Ghrita14Ghrita 10 ml Before meal /
evening ( Nishi Kala )15-20 days Milk
Tikataka Ghrita15Ghrita 10 ml Before meal / 
evening ( Nishi Kala )15-20 days Milk
Brihat Kushmanda 
Avaleha16Avaleha 5-10 gm After meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Milk
Shatavari Paka17Avaleha 5-10 gm After meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Milk
Punarnavashtaka 
Kwatha18Decoction 20 ml Before meal /  
twice a day15-20 days Water
240 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education)
Diet education and preventive measures:
Do’s -
• Ahara :19,20,21 Regular intake of 
Yava  (Hordeum  vulgare ), Godhuma 
(Triticum  aestivum  Linn), Lohita 
Shali (Oryza  sativa  Linn), Mudga  
(Phaseolus  radiatus ), Shatavari  
(Asparagus  racemosus ), Patola 
(Trichosanthes  dioica ), Kustumburu  
(Coriander  sativum ), Surana  (Phallus  
campanulatus ), unripe banana 
(Musa spp. ), cooked vegetables 
of Jeevanti  (Leptadenia  reticulata ), 
Sunishannaka  (Marsilea  minuta ), 
Tanduleeya (Amaranthus aspera ), 
Vastuka  (Chenopodium album ), 
Karkotaka  ( Momordica dioica ), 
Karavellaka  (Momordia charantia ), 
Shigru  (Moringa oleifera ), Agastya  
(Sesbania grandiflorum ), Punarnava  
(Boerrrhavia diffusa ), brinjal, carrot, 
spinach, cow ghee, cow milk, one 
year old preserved Ghrita , meat of 
birds and wild animals, Amalaki 
(Embelica officinalis ), Draksha  (Vitis  
vinifera ) dried and fresh both, 
Dadim  (Punica granatum ), Almond, 
Saindhava  (rock salt), Sita (sugar 
candy), Kshaudra  (honey) and 
Amalaki Payasa , Shatavari Payasa  are 
beneficial for the eyes. 
• Vihara : Withdrawing the mind 
from objects of senses, Padabhyanga  
(Foot massage), Shiroabhyanga  (scalp 
massage with oil), Netraprakshalana  (eye wash), Mukhalepa  (face pack 
with herbal medicines), wearing 
head gear, always wearing shoes 
are also beneficial for the eyes.
Dont’s -
• Ahara : Excessive and regular intake 
of Horse gram and Black gram 
pulses, Virudhadhanya  (sprouts), 
chillies and spices, sour and 
fermented foods like pickles, idali, 
dosa etc, heavy foods like cheese, 
paneer, deep fried items etc, Junk 
foods and fast foods, Dadhi  (curd), 
Matsya (fish), meat of animals 
belonging to damp areas ( Anoopa 
Mamsa ), Phanita , Pinyaka  (oil cake) 
Aranala (sour gruel), excess water 
intake, excess alcohol intake, betel 
leaf chewing ( Tambula ) 
• Vihara : life style factors like 
anger, grief, excessive coitus; 
suppression of natural urges 
like defecation, micturition, 
lacrimation, hunger, thirst etc.; 
looking at minute objects, excessive 
weeping, excessive vomiting and 
suppression of vomiting, daytime 
sleep and awakening at night, shift 
duties, working on computer for 
continuous and longer duration and 
watching television for long time, 
sudden changes of temperatures, 
exposure to frequent change 
of hot and cold temperatures, 
exposure to dust and fumes, 
excessive sunlight exposure and  
smoking.
ADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 241Referral criteria:  Refer to level 3
1. Cases not responding to above therapy 
as: Patients with persistent raised intra 
ocular pressure, field loss, optic atrophy 
and sudden loss of vision, PACG etc.
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1
Investigation: 
• Gonioscopy
• Automated perimetry
• OCT to evaluate optic disc, optic 
cup.
Treatment:  In addition to the management 
of Level-2, Treatment can be done according 
to predominance of Dosha.
•	Chikitsa Sutra of Vataja 
Adhimantha22 – The patient should 
be treated with old ghee (clarified 
butter). The part of the forehead 
adjoining the eye and not the eye 
itself should be fomented and local 
venesection resorted to. Then after 
having affected full purging with 
the help of a Sneha -Basti  (oleaginous 
enema), such measures as Tarpana , 
Putapaka , fumigation, Aschyotana  
(sprinklings), Nasya  (snuffing), 
Sneha Parisheka  (oily washings), 
Shiro -Basti  or washing with any decoction prepared with the drugs 
of the Vayu -subduing group. 
•	Chikitsa Sutra of Pitaja 
Adhimantha23 – Bloodletting 
and purgatives, eye-washes and 
Vidalaka , Nasya  (snuffing) and 
Anjana  (collyrium).
•	Chikitsa Sutra of Kaphaja 
Adhimantha24 – In acute stage it 
should be treated by bloodletting 
by venesection or other means, by 
the employment of fomentation, 
Avapida Nasya, Anjana , fumigation, 
washes, Vidalaka, Kavala  (gargles).
•	Chikitsa Sutra of Raktaja 
Adhimantha25 – The patient should 
be first anointed and lubricated with 
old and matured clarified butter, 
venesection should then be resorted 
to. Vidalaka , washes, Nasya (snuffs), 
inhalation of medicated smokes, eye 
drops, collyrium, Tarpana  (soothing 
measures), Putapaka  should be 
prescribed.
•	if needed Panchakarma  procedures 
indicated for glaucoma can be 
performed such as:
POAG: (Vataja & Kaphaja Adhimantha )
• If not responding to above treatment 
then Agnikarma  (cauterization) over 
the eyebrows will be beneficial.26
• Siravyadha (bloodletting) mentioned 
in all types of glaucoma.27
• Tarpana  indicated in primary open 
angle Glaucoma not in PACG.
242 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
• Basti, Virechana  etc. are also 
indicated.
PACG: (Pittaja & Raktaja Adhimantha )
• All the treatment of POAG except 
Tarpana .
• Immediate IOP reducing treatment 
as- Tikshna Virechana, Siravyadhana  
etc.
Other oral or local drugs can be used 
according to signs & symptoms of patient.Shodhana Chikitsa
1. Virechana :
Snehapana:  Plain Gau Ghrita, Mahatriphala 
Ghrita28 / Mahatikataka Ghrita29 / Patola Ghrita30. 
Virechana  as per the status of the patient- 
Mridu / Krura Koshtha Virechana/ Koshtha 
Shuddhi with Avipattikara Churna31 5-10 gm 
with Drakshadi Kashaya32.
Tilwaka Ghrita  with Tilwaka Kashaya 5-10 gms 
may be done/ given for early few days of the 
treatment.33
2. Nasya :
Table 34.2: Uses of Nasyas in various type of Adhimantha
Vataja Adhimantha :Snehana Nasya : Oil processed with Rasna, Dashmoola, Bala, milk and drugs of 
Madhura Gana  are beneficial.34
Pittaja 
Adhimantha:Ksheersarpi (equal quantity of milk & ghee ) Nasya in every 3-3 days
Ghee processed with Pittahara  drugs Shali, Durva, Daruharidra .35
Kaphaja 
AdhimanthaAvapidana Nasya with Trikatu , Katphala  etc. Kaphashamaka  drugs.36
Rakataja 
AdhimanthaGhritamanda processed with breast milk and Madhuka, Nilotapala.37
3. Tarpana :
Table 34.3: Uses of Tarpana  in various type of Adhimantha
Vataja Adhimantha Panchamula, Jivaniya and the flesh of Kukkuta should be cooked with milk 
and this processed milk is used for Tarpana .38
Pittaja Adhimantha Shankha, Shukti, Madhu, Draksha, Yashti  and Kataka should be cooked with 
milk and this processed milk is used for Tarpana .39
Kaphaja Adhimantha The milk is cooked with goat’s liver , Agaru, Priyangu, Devadaru and it 
should be churned to obtain butter and ghee should be obtained after 
cooking it.40
ADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2434. Ashchyotana
Table 34.4: Uses of Ashchyotana & Parisheka  in various type of Adhimantha
Vataja Pittaja Kaphaja Raktaja
Ashchyotana Goat’s milk 
processed with 
leaves , root and 
bark  of Eranda .41
Goat milk 
processed with 
Haridra , Devadaru  
and Saindhava42 Goat’s milk 
processed 
with Lodhra , 
Yastimadhu  and 
ghee. 43Decoction of 
Sunthi, Triphala, 
Nimbi, Vasa, 
Lodhra44Triphala, Lodhra, 
Yashti, Sharkara, 
Musta  with cold 
water45
Shigrupallav Rasa with Honey46
Triphala decoction47
Parisheka Same drugs used in Ashchyotana can be used in Parisheka in respective Doshas.
7. Anjana
Table 34.5: Uses of Anjana  in various type of Adhimantha
Vataja Pittaja Kaphaja Raktaja
Anjana Pashupata 
Yoga48Pashupata Yoga49Fruits of Shigru 
and Karanja
Fruits and flowers 
of Brihati50Equal parts of Patala, 
Arjuna, Shriparni, 
Dhataki, Amalaki, Bilwa, 
Manjishtha  pasted with 
honey.51
8. Siramokshana :
Table 34.6: Uses of Siramokshana  in various type of Adhimantha
Vataja Adhimantha Siramokshana after sudation.52
Pittaja Adhimantha By Siravyadhana .53
Kaphaja Adhimantha After Dhoopana blood-letting ( Siravyadha) should be done followed by 
Virechana.54
Raktaja Adhimantha Leeches should be applied around the eye to induce blood-letting.55
9. Dhoomapana :
Table 34.7: Uses of Dhumapana  in various type of Adhimantha
Dhoomapana Snaihika 
Dhumapana with 
Agaru, Guggulu 
and G hrita etc.56-Dhoomapana with 
Trikatu, Haridra, 
Sarshapa, Nimba, 
Guggulu etc. 
Kaphahara Dravya.57-
244 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
1. Sushruta. Sushruta Samhita Dalhana Comm. 
– Nibandha sangraha, Uttaratantra 6/12-13; 
Chowkhambha Orientalia Varanasi, 2005.
2. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita, Tra. Himsagar Chandra Murty, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati series. Varanasi: 
Uttara khanda; 2007. p.7.
3. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/17, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
4. Bhavprakash of Sri Bhavmisra, Commentary 
by Shri Brahmasankara Mishra and Shri 
Rupalalaji Vaishya, Bhavaprakash Nighantu 
9/60-71, 10th edition, Chaukhambha 
Publications, Varanasi, 2002.
5. Bhavprakash of Sri Bhavmisra, Commentary 
by Shri Brahmasankara Mishra and 
Shri Rupalalaji Vaishya, Bhavaprakash 
Nighantu 9/91, 10th edition, Chaukhambha 
Publications, Varanasi, 2002.
6. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha 
- Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 9/13-
14, Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
7. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5:3), 2000.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5:5), 2000.
9. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:15), 2000.
10. Vrinda Madhava or Siddhayoga, 61/65 
edited and translated by Premvati Tiwari, Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, Varanasi, 
2007.
11. Vrinda Madhava or Siddhayoga, 61/67 
edited and translated by Premvati Tiwari, 
Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, Varanasi, 
2007.
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:17), 2000.
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:16), 2000.
14. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/17, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
15. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:13), 2000.
16. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part A (3/7), 2000.
17. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part A (3/27), 2000.
18. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part A (4/21), 2000.
19. Yogaratnakara, Vidyotini Hindi 
Commentary by Vaidya Lakshmipati 
Shastri; Chaukhambha Prakashan Vranasi 
Edition 2008.
20. Sushruta. Sushruta Samhita Dalhana Comm. 
- Nibandhasangraha, Uttaratantra 17/50-
51, Chowkhambha Orientalia Varanasi,  
2005.REFERENCES
ADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 24521. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha 
- Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 56, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
22. Shri Dalhana Acharya Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 9/3-4, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
23. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 10/3 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
24. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 11/2-3, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
25. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/2-3, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
26. Vagabhata, Ashtanga  Hridaya with 
the commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda  Rasayana of 
Hemadri, Uttaratantra 16/21, edited by 
Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhambha Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011.
27. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/22, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.28. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:35), 2000.
29. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:34), 2000.
30. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:28),  
2000.
31. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:2), 2000.
32. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:13),  
2000.
33. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/10, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
34. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 9/10-11, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
35. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra 10/5, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
36. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra 11/3-5, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
246 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
37. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/40, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
38. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/12, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
39. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra, 12/35-36; 
edited by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
40. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/33, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
41. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra 9/13-14, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
42. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita Uttarakhanda 13/8, Tra. Himsagar 
Chandra Murty, Chaukhamba Surabharati 
series. Varanasi; 2007.
43. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita Uttarakhanda 13/8, Tra. Himsagar 
Chandra Murty, Chaukhamba Surabharati 
series. Varanasi; 2007.
44. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, Uttaratantra, 16/17 edited by 
Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhambha Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011.45. Sharangdharacharya. Sharangdhara 
Samhita, Tra. Himsagar Chandra Murty, 
Uttara khanda 13/9,Chaukhamba 
Surabharati series. Varanasi; 2007.
46. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with 
the commentaries Sarvangasundaraof 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri: Uttaratantra, 16/9, edited by 
Pandit HariSadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhamba Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011.
47. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:9), 2000.
48. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, : Uttaratantra 16/25-27, edited 
by Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhambha Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011.
49. Vagbhata, Ashtanga Hridaya with the 
commentaries Sarvangasundara of 
Arundatta and Ayurveda Rasayana of 
Hemadri, Uttaratantra 16/25-27, edited 
by Pandit Hari Sadasiva Sastri Paradakara 
Bhisagacarya; Chaukhamba Orientalia, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2011.
50. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 11/6-9, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
51. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/11-12 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
ADHIMANTHA (GLAUCOMA)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 24752. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu, Uttartantra, 19/10, 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
53. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 10/3 edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
54. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 19/30; edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.55. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary, Uttaratantra 12/8, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.
56. Vrddha Vagbhata, Ashtanga Samgraha - 
Sasilekha Comm. Indu; Uttartantra, 19/11 
Chaukhambha Krishna Das Academy, 
Varanasi, 2000.
57. Shri Dalhana Acharya, Sushruta, Sushruta 
Samhita with Nibandhasamgraha 
commentary Uttaratantra 11/3-5, edited 
by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008.

Urdhwa Jatrugata Roga

INTRODUCTION
The Dantamulagata  Rogas  viz. diseases of 
the periodontium are considered under 
the heading of Mukha  Rogas . Dantaveshtaka  
means covering of the teeth. On the basis of 
symptoms Dantaveshta  can be correlated with 
Periodontitis. Periodontitis is an inflamma -
tory disease of the supporting tissues of the 
tooth resulting in progressive destruction of 
periodontal ligaments & alveolar bone with 
pocket formation, recession or both. There -
fore in severe case, teeth become mobile.
Case Definition: 
Dantaveshta is characterized by Raktasrava 
(bleeding from gum/s), Pooyasrava from  
Dantamansa (pus discharge from gums) and 
Danta Chalatva (mobility of tooth/teeth).1
Differential Diagnosis
• Shitada  - The gums of the teeth 
suddenly bleed and become 
putrified, black, slimy and emit a 
fetid smell. They become soft and 
gradually slough off. 2
• Danta Pupputa  - In this disease the 
roots of two or three teeth at a time are marked by severe swelling and 
pain.3 
• Upakusha - In this disease the 
gums become marked by a burning 
sensation and suppuration and the 
teeth become loose and shaky in 
consequence and bleed on minimal 
touch.4
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  Ayurvedic differential 
diagnosis can be done on the basis of signs 
and symptoms mentioned above.
Investigation:  Though much can be diagnosed 
based on the clinical signs and symptoms, 
investigations help the physician to confirm 
the diagnosis and rule out other conditions.
Treatment:
Chikitsa  Sutra : Kaya Virechana (purgation of 
the body), Shiro Virechana (purgation of the 
head), mouth gargles with liquids of pungent 
and bitter taste and therapies.5
In the initial stage when the patient is having 
above mentioned signs and symptoms 
following drugs may be given:DANTAVESHTA  (PERIODONTITIS)
Table 35.1: Medicines at level 1 for Dantaveshtaka
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of administration / Retention time Duration
Panchvalkala Kwatha6Kwatha 40 ml Gentle gargling / thrice a day 5-7 days
Kshirivriksha Kashaya7Kwatha 40 ml 10 min retention in mouth / twice a day 5-7 days
Dashanasanskara Churna8Churna 1 gm Pratisarana  / thrice a day 5-7 days
Kalaka Churna9Churna 1 gm Pratisarana  / thrice a day 5-7 days
Pitaka Churna10Churna 1 gm Pratisarana  / thrice a day 5-7 days
252 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESDANTAVESHTA (PERIODONTITIS)
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s - 
• Ahara : Freshly cooked, easily 
digestible diet such as barley, green 
gram, bitter guard, other bitter 
foods, ghee, luke warm water etc. 
should be taken.
• Vihara : Regular mouth washes with 
normal water, luke warm water, 
camphor water, fomentation, betel 
leaf chewing, Dhoomapana .
Don’ts -
• Ahara : Spicy and sour food11 e.g. 
pickles, curd, butter milk, Masha  
soup  (soup of black beans), any 
preparations of Ikshu Swarasa  e.g. 
sugar, sugarcane juice, jaggery; 
chocolates, sweets, confectionary 
items, meat which is heavy to digest & other foods which is heavy too 
i.e. milk, curd, dry & hard foods.
• Vihara : over brushing, sleeping in 
prone posture, day sleep
Referral Criteria:  If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 5 or 
7 days and if signs and symptoms observed 
other than above mentioned signs and 
symptoms should be referred to higher level.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 for fresh 
case reporting directly.
Investigation:  same as level 1: In addition 
detail history should be taken. 
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. 
Table 35.2: Medicines at level 2 for Dantaveshtaka
Drugs Dosage form Dose Time of administration Duration
Irimedadi Taila12 Taila 10 to 20 ml 
as requiredThrice a day for gum 
massage10 days
Khadiradi Gutika13Vati 1 Vati Thrice a day for gum 
massage10 days
Triphala Guggulu14Vati 2 Vati Thrice a day 10 days
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):  Same as level 1
Referral criteria:  If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 10 days or signs and symptoms become more 
acute and required for Panchkarma  therapy 
should be refer to higher level
DANTAVESHTA (PERIODONTITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 253LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL / INTEGRATED 
AYURVEDIC HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Differential diagnosis 
should be made as per signs and symptoms 
mentioned above.
Investigation: Dental X-rayTreatment:  Scaling should be done followed 
by treatment given below -
In addition to the management of Level 1 
and Level 2, following special procedures 
indicated for different Dantmulagata Roga 
(disease of gums) can be performed.
Shodhana Chikitsa : In all Dantmulagata 
Roga, Raktamokshana should be done first 
then following procedures should be  
observed
Table 35.3: Kriya  Kalpa  / Panchakarma  at level 3 for Dantaveshtaka
Kriya  Kalpa  / 
PanchakarmaDrug Dose Duration
Pratisarana Rodhradi Churna15 (Lodhra , Yashti , Laksha , Madhu )2-3 gms 2 times in a day 
for 7-21 days
Gandoosha Panchavalkal Kwath / Kshirivriksha Kashaya  with 
honey, Ghrita  and Sharkara1640-60 ml 7-21 days
 Marsha Nasya Kakolyadi Ghrita / Yashtimadhu Ghrita178-8 drops in 
each nostrils7 days
Pathya - Apathya  (Diet and life style education) : Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Nidana Sthana 
16/8, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 296.
2. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
16/15-16, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 295.
3. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
16/17, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 296.4. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
16/23-24, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 296.
5. Yoga Ratnakara . Samasta Dantaveshta 
Chikitsa  1-3, In: Vidyotani Hindi 
Commentary, Reprint, Varanasi: 
Chaukamba Prakashana, 2013, p. 218.
6. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/17, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68.
254 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESDANTAVESHTA (PERIODONTITIS)
7. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/17, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68.
8. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (7:6), 2000, 
p. 83.
9. Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
26/195, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 752.
10. Charaka, Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
26/197, In: Yadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit 
Sansthan; 2009. p. 753.
11. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/42, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 100.
12. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:2), 2000, 
p.366.
13. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:6), 2000, 
p.505.
14. Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (5:5), 2000, 
p. 212.
15. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/17, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68.
16. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/16, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68.
17. Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/15, In: Ambikaduttashastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68.
INTRODUCTION
The Sarvasara Rogas viz. diseases affecting 
the whole Mukha are considered under the 
heading of Mukharogas .1 These are important 
among all the diseases upon which the entire 
oral as well as general health and hygiene 
revolves. As per Ayurveda depending upon 
the predominance of the Dosha , Mukhapaka  
are of three types. Vataja Mukhapaka 
presents with Sphota (small follicles) with 
Toda (pricking pain), Pittaja Mukhapaka 
presents with Sphota (small follicles) with 
Daha (burning sensation), while Kaphaja 
Mukhapaka is characterized by Sphota (small 
follicles) which are Savarna (same colour), 
associated with Kandu  (itching) and Alparuja  
(mild pain)2
Case Definition:
Mukhapaka is diagnosed on the basis of 
presence of Vrana or Shotha (ulcer or 
inflammation or follicle) in Mukha (oral 
cavity) which includes Ostha (lips), Dantamula  
(gums), Danta  (teeth), Jihwa (tongue), Talu 
(palate), Gala  (pharynx) and Galadisakala  
(complete oral cavity). Therefore Mukhapaka  
is the disease where inflammatory process 
occurs & that involves mucosa of whole oral cavity. Though whole mucosa of cavity is not 
involved at a same time, it may cover any 
part of oral mucosa.
Differential Diagnosis:
Differential diagnosis can be done on the 
basis of signs and symptoms of above three 
mentioned varieties of Mukhapaka .
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis:  Diagnosis can be done 
on the basis of clinical presentation
Investigation:  Torch light examination: 
Sphota  or Vrana  may be observed
Treatment: 
Chikitsa Sutra : Initially in Mukhapaka, 
Gandhusha (gargling the mouth with the 
decoction) of Triphala, Patha, Mridwika and 
tender buds of Jati added with honey should 
be done or Triphala may be chewed and  
spit out.3
In addition to it when the patient is having 
mild features of Mukhpaka following drugs 
may be given for local application or gurgling 
or orally as per the status of the disease:MUKHAPAKA  (STOMATITIS)
256 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUKHAPAKA (STOMATITIS)
Table 36.1: Medicines at level 1 for Mukhapaka
 Drugs Form  Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Drugs for external application
Shudha Gairika Churna and 
Yashtimadhu Churna4Churna 1 gm of each 
ChurnaThrice a day for 
local applicationHoney and 
Ghrita5-7 days
Pratisarana with Tankana / 
Saindhava Lavana5Churna 1 gm of each 
ChurnaThrice a day for 
local applicationHoney 5-7 days
Pratisarana with 
Darvighana & Gairika6Churna 1 gm of each 
ChurnaThrice a day for 
local applicationHoney 5-7 days
Ksaudra  (honey)7Liquid 1 tsp. Thrice a day for 
gargleMixed with 
water5-7 days
Jatipatra8Paste 5 gm Thrice a day for 
local application- 5-7 days
Drugs for internal usage:
Swadishta Virechan Churna9Churna 4 gm at night  Once at night Hot water 5-7 days
Samshamani Vati10Vati 2 tab Twice a day Normal 
water5-7 days
Ikshuwika Rasa  i.e. sugar, sugar -
cane juice, jaggery; food articles 
which is heavy to digest like meat, 
cheese, Paneer , milk and dry & hard  
foods.12
• Vihara : Over brushing, sleeping in 
prone posture, day sleep13
Referral Criteria:  If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 
5 or 7 days, he should be refer to higher  
level.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1 
Investigation:  Same as level 1 Pathya-Apathya (Diet and life style 
education): 
Do’s –
• Ahara : Freshly cooked, easily 
digestible diet such as barley, green 
gram, bitter guard, other bitter 
foods, ghee, lukewarm water etc. 
should be taken.
• Vihara : Regular mouth washes with 
normal water or lukewarm water or 
camphor water, betel leaf chewing, 
Dhumapana .11
Don’ts ( Apathya ):
• Ahara : Spicy and sour food, curd, 
butter milk, Masha soup  (soup of 
black beans), any preparations of 
MUKHAPAKA (STOMATITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 257Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Rasaushadhi  (Herbo-mineral drugs) can be used at 
this level. Patient may be kept under 
observation while prescribing these kinds of  
medicines.
Table 36.2: Medicines at level 2 for Mukhapaka
Drugs Dosage Form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Drugs for gargling or local application:
Triphala Kwatha14Decoction 100 ml Gargle with it 3- 4 
times in a dayHoney 5 days
Triphala Kwatha mixed 
with  Darvi, Guduchi 
Mrudwika & Jatipatra15Decoction 20 ml Gargle with it 3- 4 
times in a day- 5 days
Panchavalkala Kwatha16Decoction 20 ml Gurgle with it 
3- 4 times in a day- 5 days
Panchapallava Kwatha17Decoction 20 ml Gurgle with it 
3- 4 times in a day- 5 days
Panchatikta Kwatha18Decoction 20 ml Gargle with it 3- 4 
times in a day- 5 days
Khadiradi Gutika19Vati, Churna  1 Vati Thrice a day for 
gum massage 
(local application)Mixed 
with 
honey5 days
Pratisarana with 
Darvighana & Gairika20Churna 1 gm 
of each 
ChurnaThrice a day for 
local applicationHoney 5 days
Drugs for internal administration:
Laghu Vasantamalati 
Rasa21Vati 2 Vati Twice a day Normal 
water5 days
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):  Same as level 1
Referral criteria: If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 10 
days or signs and symptoms become more 
acute or spread on another parts of Mukha  
(mouth) or there is indication for Panchakarma  
therapy, patient can be referred to level 3.LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1
Investigation: Complete Blood Count
258 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUKHAPAKA (STOMATITIS)
Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level 2, Panchkarma procedures 
i.e. Shodhana Chikitsa i.e. Raktamokshana (bloodletting), Virechana & Shirovirechana 
(Nasya ) are indicated for Mukhpaka  can be 
performed.22
Table 36.3: Medicines at level 3 for Mukhapaka
Panchakarma/ 
KriyaKalpaDrug Dose Duration
Virechana Ghrita prepared  with Madhura, Shitala and 
Pitta pacifying  medicines  (Shatavari Ghrita23 
may be used)  for Abhyantara Snehana should 
be used Eranda Taila  (Castor oil) or Triphala 
Kwatha24 or Trivrita Avale ha5-10 gm Daily or once 
in a month.
Pratisarana Yashtimadhu Churna with honey252-3 gm 7-21 days
Gandoosha Krishnadi Taila2620 ml 7-21 days
Dhumapana Eranda , Shala , Madhooka , Guggulu , Jatamamsi , 
Tagar etc27.5 gm 7 days
Nasya Dhashamula Siddha Taila.288-8 drops in 
each nostril7 days
1 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Nidana Sthana 
16/3, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 294
2 Yogaratnakara Samasta Mukharoga Nidana 
1, In: Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 296
3 Yogaratnakara Mukharoga Chikitsa 2-3, 
In: Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 3074 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/5, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 68 
5 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/67, In: Ambikadutta shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 102
6 Yogaratanakara. Mukharoga Chikitsa 7, 
In: Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 307Note: Anupana  - In Pittaja Mukhapaka  medicine should be taken with Ghrita  and in Vata  and Kaphaja Mukhapaka  
medicine should be taken with honey.
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style education):   Same as level 1
REFERENCES
MUKHAPAKA (STOMATITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2597 Sharangadhara, Sharangadhara Samhita, 
Uttara Khanda10/10, In: Jivanprada 
Hindi Commentatory, Reprint, Varanasi: 
Chaukhambha Orientalia; 2011, p. 421
8 Yogaratnakara. Mukharoga Chikitsa 3, In: 
Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 307 
9 Ayurved Martanda, Siddhayoga 
Samghraha, eleventh edition, Nagpur: 
Bhaidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Limited, 
2000, Page no. 691
10 Ayurved Martanda, Siddhayoga 
Samghraha, Jwara Adhikara, eleventh 
edition, Nagpur: Bhaidyanath Ayurved 
Bhawan Limited, 2000, p. 4
11 Yogaratnakara, Pathya Apathya Vidhi 13, 
In: Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 309
12 Yogaratnakara, Mukharoga Nidana 2, In: 
Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 287
13 Yogaratnakara, Pathya Apathya Vidhi 4-5, 
In: Vidyotani Hindi Commentary, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 309
14 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:9), 2000, 
p. 43
15 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:9), 2000, 
p. 43
16 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/17, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 98
17 Bhavaprakash Nighantu of Sri Bhavamisra, 
Commentary by Shri Brahmasankara 
Mishra and Shri Rupalalaji Vaishya, 66/159, 
10th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 2002
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:19), 2000, 
p. 185
19 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:6), 2000, 
p. 506
20 Bhavaprakash Nighantu of Sri Bhavamisra, 
Commentary by Shri Brahmasankara 
Mishra and Shri Rupalalaji Vaishya, 66/161, 
10th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 2002
21 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:26), 2000, 
p. 694
22 Yogaratnakara. Samasta Mukharoga  
Chikitsa 1, In: Vidyotani Hindi Commen -
tary, Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukambha 
Prakashana, 2013, p. 307
23 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (6:4), 2000, 
p. 73
24 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:9), 2000, 
p. 175
25 Bhavaprakash Nighantu of Sri Bhavamisra, 
Commentary by Shri Brahmasankara 
260 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESMUKHAPAKA (STOMATITIS)
Mishra and Shri Rupalalaji Vaishya, 1/146, 
10th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 2002
26 Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hrudyam with 
Vidhyotani Hindi commentary U. 22/75 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadunandana Upahaya, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrita Series Office, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2006.27 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 
22/69, In: Ambikadutta Shastri, Reprint, 
Varanasi: Chaukamba Sanskrit Sansthan; 
2008, p. 102
28 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (8:6), 2000, 
p. 109.
INTRODUCTION
Pratishyaya  is very common complaint in 
ENT. Simply it means running nose. In 
Pratishyaya  running nose, sneezing, heaviness 
in head, white thick nasal discharge, loss of 
appetite, itching of nose and eyes are the 
clinical presentation.1 According to Acharya 
Sushruta  the condition in which Kapha / Pitta 
/ Rakta Dosha  moves in the direction of Vata 
Dosha  is referred to as Pratishyaya .2 Obviously 
the definition iterates the significance of 
Vata Dosha  in the causation of the disease 
Pratishyaya . In other words, it is mainly the 
Vata Dosha  whose equilibrium should be 
maintained for the prevention/management 
of Pratishyaya . 
Types of Pratishyaya :
1. Vataja : Nasal discharge is of watery and 
copious type, sneezing and rhinorrhea.3
2. Pittaja : High grade inflammation is 
present and leads to secondary infections 
like furunculosis, discharge is thick and 
purulent.4
3. Kaphaja : Discharge becomes more thick, 
purulent and foul-smelling. Heaviness 
in head and the body is more in this 
type.5
4. Raktaja : Blood stained discharge. The 
infection may spread to eye, causing red 
eye.65. Sannipataja : The spontaneous disappear -
ance as well as appearance of Pratishy -
aya. Mixed symptoms of all the three 
types of Pratishyaya .7
Case Definition:
Patient presenting with continuous nasal 
discharge, occurring due to irritation and 
inflammation of the mucous membrane of 
the nose characterised by mainly stuffy nose 
and post nasal drip.
Differential diagnosis:
• Putinasya : In this disease the fetid 
breath is emitted through the mouth 
and nostrils.8
• Kshavathu : In this disease the 
frequency of sneezing is more than 
Pratishyaya .9
• Nasasrava : In this disease there 
is constant, transparent, slightly 
discoloured water-like secretion 
through the nostrils more 
particularly at night.10
Differential Diagnosis of Rhinitis:
• Allergic Rhinitis
• Atrophic rhinitis
• Drug induced rhinitis
• Emotional rhinitis
• Hormone induced rhinitisPRATISHYAYA  (RHINITIS)
262 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
• Infectious rhinitis
• CSF rhinorrhoea 
• Structural conditions like deviated 
nasal septum, enlarged adenoids, 
nasal polyposis, etc
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDIC 
PHYSICIAN’S CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: On the basis of history 
and clinical presentation patient can be 
diagnosed provisionally as case of rhinitis. 
However, in the initial stages for deciding of 
line of management, it should be confirmed 
that whether it is allergic rhinitis or infectious 
rhinitis.
Investigations:  The condition can be 
diagnosed based on the clinical signs and 
symptoms. Laboratory investigations may 
not be needed at this level.
Treatment:
Ama /Nava Pratishyaya (Acute phase)11: In 
Apakva Pratishyaya , following treatment for 
Pachana (digestion) is to be prescribed:
1. Langhana  (with fasting)
2. Swedana  (fomentation)
3. Intake of warm food containing Amla 
Rasa like oranges, lemon, Kulattha soup, 
Indian gooseberry etc.4. Ginger should be taken with milk or 
with sugarcane preparation for Pachana 
(digestion)12
5. Dhuma Sevana  by Mallaka Samput  made 
of Sattu  mixed with Ghrita  and Taila  is 
beneficial in Pratishyaya .13
• Pakva Pratishyaya:14 The chronic, 
thickened i.e. mucopurulent / 
purulent and stagnated discharges 
- Doshas  should be expelled out by 
the use of following measures –
1. Shirovirechana
2. Virechana
3. Asthapana
4. Dhumapana
5. Kavalagraha
6. Haritaki Sevana
• Dushta Pratishyaya:15
Patient should be made to drink ghee mixed 
with honey prepared from Vyosha (mixture 
of Piper longum , Piper nigrum  and Zingiber 
officinale ), Chitraka (Plumbago  zeylenica ), 
Yavakshara (salt of barley), Bijaka (Pterocarpus 
marsupium ), Vidanga (Embelia ribes ), bark of 
Putikaranj (Caesalpinia bonduc ), Lavanatraya , 
added with juice of meat. After digestion of 
this ghee, he should take food along with 
soup of meat of animals of desert-like region.
In the initial stage when the patient is having 
mild features of rhinitis  due to allergy or 
infections two or more of following drugs 
may be given:
PRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 263Table 37.1: Medicines at level 1 for Pratishyaya
Orally Dose Dosage 
formTime of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Sitopaladi Churna162-3 gm Churna Before meal/ 
twice-thrice dailyHoney/ Ghrita 2-3 weeks
Talishadi Churna172-3 gm Churna Before meal/ 
twice-thrice dailyHoney / Ghrita 2-3 weeks
Gojihvadi Kwatha18 20-40 ml Decoction Before meal/ 
twice daily- 2-3 weeks
Dashmoola Kwatha1920-40 ml Decoction Before meal/ 
twice daily- 2-3 weeks
Vyoshadi Vati202 tab, Vati Before meal/
thrice dailyWarm water 2-3 weeks
Lavangadi Vati211 tab Vati Frequently
5-6 pills daily 2-3 weeks
Trikatu Churna22 2-3 gm Powder Before meal/ 
twice-thrice dailyGuda + Ghrita 2-3 weeks
Haridra Khanda23   6 gm Granules/ 
ChurnaBefore meal/ 
once dailyLuke warm 
water 2 months
Chitraka Haritaki 
Avaleha24   
 5-10 gm Avaleha Before meal/ 
twice dailyLuke warm 
water/ milk1 month
Drakshavleha2510-20 gm Avaleha Before meal/ 
twice dailyLuke warm 
water/ milk1 month
Vasavaleha2610-20 gm Avaleha Before meal/ 
twice dailyLuke warm 
water1 month
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s –
• Ahara : Patient is advised to take 
old Shali  and Sathi  rice, wheat, 
barley, green gram, brinjal, drum 
sticks, bitter gourd, ginger, black Along with it some procedures can be carried 
out like steam inhalation with sowa seeds, 
eucalyptus oil, camphor etc.
Whenever needed symptomatic treatment 
of associated conditions can also been done 
e.g. if patients complains of fever, Sudarshana 
Ghana Vati  1-2 tablet after meal twice or thrice 
daily can also be added.
264 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
piper, long pippali, cow milk, cow 
ghee, jaggery, indian gooseberry, 
pomegranate, grapes, oranges etc. ; 
Drink lukewarm water, cow milk 
with ginger and jiggery.
• Vihara : Patient should take 
complete rest, cover the head with 
warm clothes, take steam inhalation.
Don’ts–
• Ahara: Patient should not take 
heavy food articles and preparation 
like cheese, paneer, sweets etc, 
refined foods such as white flour, 
bread, pizza, noodles etc. He should 
avoid cold drinks, ice-creams, 
chilled water, sweets and fermented 
food items like bread, Idali, Dosa, 
Khamana , etc. He must avoid 
Vishamashana  (irregular dietary  
habits)27
• Vihara: Patient should avoid head 
bath with cold water, direct wind 
and air condition exposure, dust 
and pollen exposure, excessive 
liquid intake after taking meal.28Referral criteria: Patient not responding to 
above mentioned management and show 
symptoms of rhinitis like excessive discharge, 
foul smelling and altered discharge from 
nose, increased nasal blockage, headache, 
fever etc. patient should refer to level 2.
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical diagnosis: Same as level 1
Investigation:
1. Anterior rhinoscopy:
2. Discharge in nose, congestion, deviation 
of nasal septum etc
3. Oropharynx examination:
4. Post nasal discharge
5. Blood for Hb, TLC (leucocytosis), ESR
6. X-ray PNS
Treatment:  In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient.
Table 37.2: Medicines at level 2 for Pratishyay
Compound/
formulationDose Dosage 
formTime of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Arogyavardhini 
Rasa29 125-250 mg Vati twice a day/  
after mealMadhu 2-3 weeks
Naradiya Lakshmi 
vilasa Rasa30125-250 mg  Vati
 2-3 times a day/ 
before mealMadhu/Tulsi 
Swaras/Ardrak 
Swarasa,2-3 weeks
Suvarnavasanta 
malini Rasa31125-250 mg Vati / 
ChurnaTwice a day/  
after mealHoney/
Pippali2-3 weeks
PRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 265Abhraka Bhasma32125- 250 mg Bhasma Twice a day/  
after mealHoney 2-3 weeks
Shringyadi 
Churna332- 3 gm Churna Twice a day/after 
mealGoat meat/ 
luke warm 
water2-3 weeks
Pushkarmula 
Churna750 – 1250 
mgChurna Twice a day/after 
mealHoney 2-3 weeks
Swasa Kuthara 
Rasa34625 mg Churna  / 
VatiTwice a day/after 
mealUshnodaka, 
Kshudra 
(Kantakari ) 
Kwath2-3 weeks
Kushmanda 
Rasayana3520 gm Avaleha Before meal/ 
twice dailyMilk / 
lukewarm 
water1 month
Vyaghriharitaki365-15 gm Avaleha Before meal/ 
twice dailyMilk / 
lukewarm 
water1 month
Eladi Churna375 gm Churna Before meal/ 
twice dailyHoney/ sugar 2-3weeks
Marichadi Gutika381 tab Vati Frequently/ 4-5 
daily2-3 weeks
LEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL/ 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS
Clinical Diagnosis: Same as level 1, for a 
fresh case reporting directly
Investigation:
• Nasal endoscopy
• CT Scan• As per the status of the patient, 
Mridu Shodhana, Nasya with Anu 
Taila39/ Shadabindu Taila40 may 
be done for early few days of the 
treatment.
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1
Referral criteria: refer to level 3
1. Cases not responding to above therapy.
2. Patients with excessive discharge, 
foul smelling and altered discharge, 
headache, fever etc patient to showed 
referred for level 3
266 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
Treatment:  In addition to the management of 
Level 1 and Level - 2, if needed Panchakarma  
procedures indicated for Pratishyaya can be 
performed.
Shodhana Chikitsa : Indicated only in the 
patients who are in Uttama Bala  and can 
tolerate Shodhana  procedures
• Shirovirechana Nasya with Apamarga 
Beeja41 (seeds of Achyranthus aspera ), 
Katphala42 (Myrica  esculenta ) etc 
followed by Snehan / Avapida 
Nasya (with cow ghee / paste of 
Yastimadhu43 (Glycyrrhiza  glabra )
• Shadbindu Taila,44 Nirgundi (Vitex  
negundo ) Taila, Shunti (Ginger) + 
Guda (jaggery) Nasya, Tulasyadi 
Nasya
Dose and Duration:  Marsha Nasya (6-10 
drops for 1 week, 2-3 sittings) – followed by 
Pratimarhsa Nasya (2 drops regularly)• Dhumpana  with Haridra , Yastimadhu 
(Glycyrrhiza  glabra ), Sarshapa , 
Vidanga (Embelia ribes ), Guggulu 
(Commiphora  mukul ) and ghee
• Asthapana, Anuvasan and Shirobasti  
in Apakva Vataja Pratishyaya45
• Vamana  with liquids like Lavanodaka 
(salt water) in Vata Kaphaupsrusht46
• Vamana with Tila, Mash Yavagu  in 
Kaphaja Pratishyaya47
• Virechana  with Madhura Rasa 
Pradhana  Drvyas  like Yashtimadhu in 
Pitta Raktaja Pratishyaya48
Rasayana Chikitsa: Ghritapana/ medicated 
Ghritapana for 1 month49
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as Level 1
REFERENCES
1 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/5 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.118
2 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/4 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.118
3 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/6-
7 Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.119
4 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/8 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.119
5 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/9 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.119
PRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2676 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana 
U. 24/12-13 Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji 
Trikamaji Acharya, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 
2010. p.119
7 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana 
U. 24/10-11 Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji 
Trikamaji Acharya, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 
2010. p.119
8 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 22/7 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.106
9 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 22/12 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.108
10 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 22/16 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p. 110
11 Agnivesha, Charaka Samhita with 
Ayurveda Deepika commentary by 
Chakrapanidutta Chi. 26/136, Ed. By Vaidya 
Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, Chaukhambha 
Surbharati Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 
2011
12 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/19 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p.120
13 Yoga Ratnakara Pratishaya Pratikara 2, 
In: Vidyotani hindi commentary, Reprint, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Prakashana, 2013, 
p. 328
14 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/20 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010.
15 Vrudhdha Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Samgraha 
with Shashilekha commentary by Indu, 
U.24/22 Ed. by Shivaprasada Sharma, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrita Series Office, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2006.
16 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:4), 2000 
17 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:13), 2000
18 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:7), 2000, 
p.41
19 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (4:10), 
2000,p.176 
20 Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Hridayam with 
Vidhyotani hindi commentary U.20/5-6 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadunandana Upadhyaya, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrita Series Office, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2006.
21 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:26), 2000, 
p.537
22 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:14), 2000, 
p.322
268 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESPRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
23 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:31), 2000, 
p.162
24 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:10), 2000, 
p.126
25 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:15), 
2000,p.136
26 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:26), 2000, 
p.153
27 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/22 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010.
28 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 4/22 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p. 120
29 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:4), 2000, 
p.664
30 Shri Govindacharya, Bhaisajya Ratnavali 
with Vidyotini hindi commentary by Sri 
Kaviraja Ambikadutta Shastri, edited by 
Acharya Rajeshwaradutta Shastri, 73/55-68, 
18th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 2007 
31 Siddha Bhaishajya Mani Mala, Jvaraadhikar 
60-6232 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (18:1), 2000, 
p.591
33 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:31), 2000, 
p.345
34 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (20:49), 2000, 
p.730
35 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (3:7), 2000, 
p.120
36 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (3:6), 2000, 
p.31
37 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:5), 2000, 
p.312
38 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (12:20), 2000, 
p.527
39 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:1), 2000, 
p.365
40 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:58), 2000, 
p.455
41 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, vol. I (4), p. 9
PRATISHYAYA (RHINITIS)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 26942 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, vol. III (42), 
p.107
43 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, part I, vol. I (79), 
p.127
44 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:58), 2000, 
p.455
45 Vrudhdha Vagbhatta, Ashtanga Samgraha 
with Shashilekha commentary by Indu, 
U.24/10 Ed. by Shivaprasada Sharma, 
Chaukhambha Sanskrita Series Office, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2006.
46 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana, U. 24/24, Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji 
Acharya, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 2010.
47 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana, 
U. 24/30, Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji 
Acharya, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 2010.
48 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana, 
U.24/27, Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji 
Acharya, Chaukhambha Surbharati 
Prakashana, Varanasi, Reprint 2010.
49 Sushruta, Sushruta Samhita, with Nibandha 
Samgraha commentary by Dalhana U. 24/18 
Ed. by Vaidya Yadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, 
Chaukhambha Surbharati Prakashana, 
Varanasi, Reprint 2010. p. 120
INTRODUCTION
Shirashoola  type of Shiroroga , is painful 
conditions of the head, which can be a 
symptom of many diseases as well as occur SHIRASHOOLA  (HEADACHE)
as an independent disease entity as Shiroroga . 
Clinical features of different types of Shiroroga  
presenting with headache depending on the 
nature of the pain and Doshas  involved are 
given in the following table1:
Table 38.1: Clinical features of different types of Shiroroga
No Type of Shiroroga Signs and symptoms
1 Vataja Shiroroga Tivra Ruja in Shira (acute pain in head and aggravates at night)
- Gets relieved by applying bandage and fomentation around  
the head 
2 Pittaja Shiroroga - Ushnam Angararachitam (acute burning sensation in head)
- Dhoomavat Shira and Nasa (feeling of smoke in head and 
nostrils) 
- Gets relieved at night due to cold atmosphere
3 Kaphaja Shiroroga - Kaphopadigdhatvam in Shira and Gala (feeling of coating of sticky 
mucus in head and throat)
- Feeling of Guruta in Shira (heaviness in head)
- Pratistabdhata in Shira (feeling of stiffness in the head)
- Shunakshikootavadanama  (swelling on lower eye lid and face)
4 Tridoshaja Shiroroga Mixed clinical features seen
5 Raktaja Shiroroga All the signs and symptoms of Pittaja Shiroroga with acute 
tenderness
6 Kshayaja Shiroroga Very acute headache, not controlled by any primary treatment 
modality
7 Krimija Shiroroga Acute headache, insect biting sensation, bleeding from nose with 
water and worms or maggots 
8 Suryavarta Severe headache, pain increases with sunrise and decreases with 
sunset
9 Ardhavabhedaka Sudden and acute onset of pricking pain in head
10 Anantavata Acute pain in neck, eye, eyebrow, temporal region, tremors, lock 
jaw
11 Shankhaka Acute pain in head and temporal region
SHIRASHOOLA (HEADACHE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 271
Case Definition: Patient presenting with 
Shoola (pain) in the head region. 
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA 
PHYSICIAN CLINIC/PHC
Clinical Diagnosis: Ayurvedic differential 
diagnosis can be done on the basis of signs 
and symptoms mentioned above.
Investigation:  At this level diagnoses can be 
done on the basis of clinical presentation and 
proper history taking.Treatment: 
Chikitsasutra:2 Nidana Parivarjana , Snehana, 
Upanaha, Svedana, Nasyakarma, Dhumapana, 
Lepa, Langhana, Parisheka, Agnikarma, 
Raktamokshana, Shirobasti can be done 
depending upon the cause and type of 
Shirashoola .
In the initial stage when the patient is having 
signs and symptoms of Shirashoola, following 
drugs may be given:
Table 38.2: Medicines at level 1 for Shiroroga
Drugs Dosage Form Dose Time of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Pathyadi Kwatha3 Decoction 20 ml Twice a day Guda  5 days
Gau Ghrita Luke warm 
ghee3 drops in 
each nostrils4 times a day - 5 days
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education):
Do’s –
• Ahara (Food articles):  Freshly 
cooked, easily digestible diet i.e. 
Purana Ghrita , Shali/ Shashtika  rice, 
cow milk, drumstick, grapes, bitter 
guard, butter milk, coconut water, 
etc. should be taken
• Vihara : Rest, fomentation, Lepa, 
Dhumapana , fasting
Don’ts–
• Ahara : Excessive and regular intake 
of horse gram and black gram pulses, Virudha Dhanya (sprouts), 
chillies and spices, sour and 
fermented foods like pickles, Idali, 
Dosa  etc, heavy foods like cheese, 
paneer, deep fried items etc., junk 
foods and fast foods, Dadhi  (curd), 
Matsya (fish), meat of animals 
belonging to damp areas ( Anupa 
Mamsa ), Phanita, Pinyaka  (oil cake) 
Aranala (sour gruel), excess water 
intake, excess alcohol intake, betel 
leaf chewing ( Tambula ) 
• Vihara : Life style factors like anger, 
grief, excessive coitus; suppression 
of natural urges like defecation, 
micturition, lacrimation, hunger, 
thirst etc.; looking at minute objects, 
272 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSHIRASHOOLA (HEADACHE)
excessive weeping, excessive vom -
iting and suppression of vomiting, 
daytime sleep and awakening at 
night, shift duties, working on com -
puter for continuous and longer 
duration and watching television 
for long time, sudden changes of 
temperatures, exposure to frequent 
change of hot and cold tempera -
tures, exposure to dust and fumes, 
excessive sunlight exposure and 
smoking .
Referral criteria : If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 5 or 
7 days and if signs and symptoms indicate 
towards need for further investigationsLEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL 
HOSPITALS WITH BASIC 
FACILITIES
Clinical Diagnosis:  Same as level 1 
Investigation: If needed 
1. Complete Blood Count
2. X-ray skull
Treatment: In addition to the management 
mentioned in Level 1, few of the following 
drugs may be added as per the requirement 
and status of the patient. Rasaushadhi  (her -
bo-mineral drugs) can be used at this level. 
Patient may be kept under observation while 
prescribing these kinds of medicines.
Table 38.3: Medicines at level 2 for Shiroroga
Drugs Dosage 
FormDose Time of 
administrationAnupana Duration
Shirahshooladi Vajra 
Rasa4Vati 2 tab Twice a day Normal water 5 days
Shadabindu Taila 
Nasya5Oil 3 drops in 
each nostrilOnce a day - 7 days
Dashamoola Taila6 for 
Abhyanga on scalpOil 15 ml Once a day - 15 days
Pathya -Apathya  (Diet and life style 
education): Same as level 1
Referral criteria: If patient is not responding 
to above mentioned management within 10 
days or signs and symptoms become more 
acute and required for Panchakarma  therapy 
should be referred to higher levelLEVEL 3: AYURVEDA 
HOSPITALS AT INSTITUTIONAL 
LEVEL OR DISTRICT HOSPITAL / 
INTEGRATED AYURVEDIC 
HOSPITALS.
Investigation: C T scan, MRI
SHIRASHOOLA (HEADACHE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 273Table 38.4: Medicines at level 3 for Shiroroga
No Type of 
ShirorogaTreatment
Kriyakalpa Drug Dose Duration
1 Vataja Shiroroga Shirodhara Luke warm cow milk 
prepared with Vata 
pacifying medicines2 litre 21 days
Upanaha
SwedaKrishara As per 
requirement21 days
Marsha Nasya Tila Taila prepared with 
Vata pacifying medicines 
i.e. Bala Taila,7 Mayura 
Ghrita, Rasnadi Taila8 drops in 
each nostril7 days
2 Pittaja Shiroroga Shirodhara Cold milk, sugarcane juice, 
Madhu Jala, Mastu2 litres 21 days
Lepa  on fore 
headPittaghna Aushadha Sidhdha 
Ghrita i.e. Kakolyadi Ghrita, 
Utpaladi Ghrit aAs per 
requirement7 days
Marsh Nasya Pitta pacifying Aushadha 
Sidhdha Ghrita  i.e. Kshira 
Sarpi, Jeevaniya Ghrita8 drops in 
each nostril7 days
Virechana Trivrita Avaleha or Ghrita 20 gm One day
3 Kaphaj Shiroroga Pradhaman 
NasyaKatphala Churna81-2 gm Once in a three 
day
Shirolepa Trivrittadi Lepa As per 
requirement7-21 days
Fomentation Water As per 
requirement7 days
4 Tridoshaja
Shiroroga- Above mentioned treatment as per predominant Dosha
- To drink old Ghrita  is especially advocated.
5 Raktajashiroroga - As per Pittaja Shiroroga
6 Kshayaja
ShirorogaGhritapana Ghrita prepared from 
milk processed with 
meat of sweet taste 
i.e. birds (sparrow, 
Lava etc), or animals 
(deer, crab etc)95 gm in morning 7 days– 21 days,
give gap of 5-7 
days and again 
Ghritapana  
should be 
startedTreatment:  In addition to the management 
of Level 1 and Level-2, Panchkarma procedures indicated for Shiroroga  can be  
performed.
274 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESSHIRASHOOLA (HEADACHE)
Marsha Nasya Vataghna Aushadh 
Siddha Taila i.e. 
Dashmula Taila108 drops in each 
nostril7 days
7 Suryavarta Ghritapana Cow ghee - plain 
or Vata pacifying 
Aushadha Siddha  i.e. 
Bala, Dashamula  etc. 5 gm in morning 7 days
Marsh Nasya Jeevaniya Ghrita 8 drops in each 
nostril7 days
Shirodhara lukewarm cow 
milk prepared with 
Vataghna  medicines2 lt 21 days
Shirobasti Luke warm cow milk As per require 21 days
8 Ardhavabhedaka Same as treatment of Suryavarta
Avapida 
NasyaShirisha Moola/Phala  or 
Vacha & Pippali116 drops in each 
nostril3 days
9 Anantavata Same as treatment of Suryavarta
10 Shankhaka Marsha 
NasyaVataghnaaushadh Sidhdha 
Ghrita i.e. Dasamula 
Ghrita12, Kshira Sarp i5 gm in morning 7 days
Shirolepa Shatavaryadi Churna13As per require 7 days
Pathya-Apathya  (Diet and life style education): Same as level 1
REFERENCES
1 Shri Dalhana Acharya on, Sushruta Samhita 
with Nibandha Samgraha commentary, 
Uttaratantra 25/3-18, edited by Vaidya 
Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, Chaukhamba 
Surbharati Prakashan Varanasi, 2008
2 Shri Govindacharya, Bhaisajya Ratnavali 
with Vidyotini hindi commentary by Sri 
Kaviraja Ambikadutta Shastri, edited by 
Acharya Rajeshwaradutta Shastri, 65/172, 
18th edition, Chaukhambha Publications, 
Varanasi, 20073 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (4:15), 2000
4 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (16:59), 2000
5 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:60), 2000
6 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part II (8:6), 2000
SHIRASHOOLA (HEADACHE)
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 2757 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (8:33), 2000
8 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (7:4), 2000
9 Shri Dalhana Acharya on, Sushruta Samhita 
with Nibandha Samgraha commentary, 
Uttaratantra 26/26, edited by Vaidya 
Acharya Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, 
Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashan 
Varanasi, 2008
10 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, part 2 (8:6), 200011 Shri Dalhana Acharya on, Sushruta Samhita 
with Nibandha Samgraha commentary, 
Uttaratantra 26/31-33, edited by Vaidya 
Jadavji Trikamji Acharya, Chaukhamba 
Surbharati Prakashan Varanasi, 2008
12 Anonymous, The Ayurvedic Formulary 
of India, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India, Part I (6:16),  
2000
13 Shri Dalhana Acharya on, Sushruta Samhita 
with Nibandha Samgraha commentary, 
Uttaratantra 26/39, edited by Vaidya Jadavji 
Trikamji Acharya, Chaukhamba Surbharati 
Prakashan Varanasi, 2008

Appendix

ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
(PATIENT EXAMINATION FORM)
Name : Vaya  : _____yrs. 
Address : Gender  : Male / Female
Desha  : Jangal/ Anoopa/ Sadharana
Jataha Samvriddha Vyadhita
Religion  : H / M/ S / Ch / J O.P.D. No. :
Marital Status  : M / UM / D / W  I.P.D. No. :
Education  : Un / E /P / M / HS / G /P / Ward/ Bed No.:
Occupation  : D.O.A. : 
Socio-eco. Status  : VP / LM / M / UM/ R Diagnosis
Lakshana Samucchaya (Chief Complaints with duration)
Lakshana (Symptoms) DURATION
1) 
2)
3)
4)
5)
VEDANA SAMUCCHRAYA (History of Present Illness):
 
 
280 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
Purva vyadhi itivritta (History of Past Illness):
Sahaja Roga Vritta (Family History):
VAIYAKTIKA ITIVRITTA (PERSONAL HISTORY): 
1.  AHARAJA : 
Type of Diet:  Vegetarian / Non-vegetarian/ Mix 
Dominance of Dravya in Diet:  G /L / St / U / Sn / R / others
Dominance of Rasa in Diet:   M / A / L / Kt / T / Ks
Dietary habits:  Regular/Irregular
 (Samashana/Adhyashana/Vishamaashana/ 
Pramitaashana/Virudhaashana   
Vyasana (Addicition):  Tobacco (Smoking/Chewing)/Alcohol/Sedative/ Other
 Matra:  Kala:- Avadhi 
2. VIHAARAJA:
Vyaayaama:  Regularly / Irregularly / No / Less / Proper / Excess
Nidraa:   Samyaka / Asamyaka; Alpa / Prabhuta / Khandita
 _____hrs. /day _____hrs. / night
3. KOSHTHA (BOWEL):   (Mridu / Madhya / Krura)
ATURABALA (DEHA BALA) PARIKSHA:
1) Prakriti:  
 a)  Shaarira:    V / P / K / VP /VK / PK / VPK 
 b)  Maanasika:  S / R /T
2) Saara:    P / M / A 
3) Samhanana:    P / M / A
4) Pramaana :    Height___cms. Weight__kgs BMI___ P / M / A 
5) Satva:    P / M / A
  Satva(Emot.make-up): Prakrita / Utsahita / Udrikta / Khinna / Avasadita /  
  Bhavanatmaka / Bhawaheena 
6) Saatmya:    P / M / A     
7) Vyaayaama Shakti:   P / M / A
8) Agni Pareeksha:   P / M / A
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 281ASHTAVIDHA ROGI PARIKSHA:
Nadi: V/P/K/VT/PT/VK/Tridoshaja
Mala:  Santushta/Asantushta/Krute api akruthascha; Samhanana:
 Kathina/Drava/Samhata 
 Sakashtam/Muhurmuhuh/Sapravahana/Sashabdha/Sashula
 Frequency : ______time / day
Mutra: Mootra Pravritti:  Samyaka/Krucchra/Vaivarnya/Daaha/Alpa/Prabhuta 
Frequency : ______times / day ______hrs. / night
App. quantity- ml/24 hrs
Jihva: Sama / Nirama
Shabda:
Sparsha:
Drika:
Akriti:
HETU (NIDAANATAH) PARIKSHA:
NIDANA DOSHA
PRAKOPAKADOOSHYA / SROTO 
DUSHTIKARAAGNI 
MANDYAKARAKHA- 
VAIGUNYAKARA
Ahara
Vihara
Manasika
Vyadhi 
Vishesha
ROGA BALA PARIKSHA:
KAPHA DOSHA PARIKSHA
PAREEKSHA 
BHAAVAVRIDDHI KSHAYA PRAKOPA
Darshana Sweta- Twachaa, Mala- 
Mootra / Sandhi Vishlesa 
/ Swaasa / KaasaRukshyataa / Sandhi 
Shaithilya Shvetataa- Mala, Mootra, 
Twak / Utsedha / Sneha 
Upachaya 
Sparshana Shaitya / Sthairya Kleda / Shaitya
282 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
Prashna Gourava / Avasaada 
/ Tandraa / Aalasya, 
Agnisaada / Praseka / 
SandhivishleshaTrushnaa / Nidraa 
Naasha / Dourbalya 
/ Antardaaha / 
Hriddrava / Bhrama 
/ Aamaashayetara 
Shlema-aasaya 
Shunyataa / Shirasasa 
cha SunyataaKandu / Sthairya / 
Gourava / Upalepa / 
Alasya / Kleebata / 
Utsaha
RASA & RASAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Krishnaangataa / Rukshata / 
Sosha Sveda / 
Paandutwa / 
Akale-Vali-
PalitaVaivarnya /Pandu /
/Shvetataa
Sparshana Loss of sensation Jwara Shaitya
Prashna Angamarda / Klaibya / 
Asyavairasya / Arasajnataa 
/ Angamarda / Hrit- Kampa 
/ Hrit Drava / Hritpidaa / 
Hritsunyataa / Trishnaa/ Hrit 
ghattana/ Sabda-asahishnutaa 
/ Hritshoola /  SramahTama Alpa Kandu / Mukha 
virasataa / Gurutaa 
/ Tandraa Aalasya / 
Utklesha / Hrillaasa /
Aruchi / Praseka / 
Vamana / Anna Dvesha /
Agni Mandya/ Asraddhaa 
/ Aruchi / Hrillaasa /
Srotorodha / Saada/ 
Hridayotkleda
Temperature
Blood Pressure
(Palpation-
Percussion – 
Auscultation)
Hridaya 
Dhamani
Lasika Granthi Inspection                Palpation                Percussion                Auscultation
ECG, X- Ray, 
USG
Biochemical 
investigations
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 283MAMSA & MAMSAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Suskataa -(Sphik- 
Ganda-Ostha-
Upastha-Uru- Vakshya 
–Kakshyaa- Pindika- 
Udara-GrivaaPutimaamsa / Alaji Vriddhi – Sphik- 
Ganda-Ostha- Upastha-
Uru- Baahu-Janghaa / 
Adhimaamsa / Arbuda
Sparshana Roukshya /
Dhamani Shaithilya 
Prashna Toda /Gaatra / Sadana Guru Gaatrataa
Khamala 
Kandara and Vasa
Avayava 
Pareeksha
Snayu, Kandara, 
Peshi, Twak 
Bio-chemical
S. Creatinine, CPK
MEDA & MEDOVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Atidirgha / 
Atihraswa / 
Atilomaa / 
Atikrishna Alomaa Snigdhaangataa / Udara 
Vriddhi / Paarshwa 
Vriddhi / Atigoura / 
Atisthoola / Jatili 
Bhaavakeseshu /
Chhidreshu Upadeham / 
Gaatre Pippilikaa Saranam 
/ Mutre Pippilikaa 
Saranam 
Sparshana Plihaa Vriddhi 
Prashna Kara - Paada 
Suptataa / Anga 
SuptataaDourgandhya / 
Daaha / Mukhasosha 
/ Taalusosha / 
Kanthasosha / 
Pipaashaa / Paridaaha 
/ VishragandhaKaasa / Swaasa / 
Maadhuryamaasye / 
Aalasya / Malakaaye
Mutradosha / Nidraa / 
Tandraa
284 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
Lipid profile
BMI / Body Wt.
Vapavahana, 
Ganda, Sphika, 
Kati, Vrikka, 
ECG, X- Ray, USG 
MAJJA & MAJAAVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Parvasu Sthoola 
mulaani Arunsi Janma 
/ Netraabhisyanda
Sparshana Asthi Soushiryataa
Prashna Parvaruk / Alpa Sukrataa / 
Parva Bheda / Asthi Nistoda 
/ Asthi Sunyataa / Asthi 
Dourvalya / Asthi Laaghava / 
Pratata Vaata RoganiMurchchhaa / 
Tamodarshana / 
BhramaSarvaanga Gourava / 
Netra Gourava
Twak Sneha
Bone Marrow
Sandhi, Pleeha
ECG, X- Ray, 
USG, MRI 
SHUKRA & SUKRAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Virupam Paandutwam / 
Sukrameha
Sparshna
Prashna Klaibya / Aharshanam / 
Roginam Alpaayu / 
Dourbalya / Mukhasosha 
/ Sadana / Shrama / Sukra 
Avisarga
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 285STANA & STANYA 
PARIKSHA
ARTAVA & 
ARTAVA 
VAHA SROTO-
PARIKSHA
Female 
Reproductive 
organs Age of menarche-   
Age of menopause-
Duration of flow___________
Duration of cycle___________
Regular / Irregular / Painful 
/ Painless /Heavy / Scanty 
/Moderate
Prasava (Obstretic History):  
No. of Deliveries / Abortions 
/Miscarriages
Semen Examination
Examination of 
Reproductive 
organs Vrishana / 
Shephas 
Testicular biopsy
OJAS: 
VATA PITTA KAPHA
Ojo Visramsa Srama / Sandhi Vislesha Gatra Sadana
Ojo Vyapat Stabdhata Guru–Gatrata, 
Tandra, Nidra
Ojakshaya Mamsa etc. Dhatuksaya / 
Moha / Pralapa/Agyna
UDAKAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Jihwaa-Taalu- Oustha-Kantha- Kloma - 
ShoshaPrashna Ati Trishnaa
Sparshana
Talu, Jihva, Netra, Twak
Especially for hydration 
purpose
286 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
PRAANAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA: 
PAREEKSHYA BHAAVA VATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Uchchhwaasa-
Atisristam, Kupitam, 
Abhikshnam, Uchchhwaasam-, 
Alpamalpam,
Sparshana
Prashna Sashabdam, 
Sashoolam  Atibaddham
Shvasa Parikshana ?????
Stheevana Pariksha
Respiratory System Inspection palpation percussion auscultation
Breath Sounds: Normal, Diminished
Type: Vesicular, Bronchial, Vesicular with prolonged expiration
Extra Sounds
Pulm. Function test
PIITA DOSHA PARIKSHA:
VRIDDHI KSHAYA PRAKOPA
Darshana Pitaababhaasataa / Pita – 
(Vid-Mutra-Netra- Twak) / 
Murchchhaa Nisprabhataa Paaka / Sweda / Kleda / 
Kotha / Sraava / Raaga / 
Murchchhaa
Sparshana Samtaapa Mandoshmataa Oushnya, 
Prashna Sitakaamitwa / 
Alpanidrataa / Valahaani / 
Indriyadourvalya Mandaagni Daaha / Kandu / Vishra 
Gandha / Sadana / 
Mada / Katukaasyataa / 
Amlaasyataa
RAKTAVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Raktakshaya / Rukshata /
Gulma / Vatashonita / 
Vaivarnya / Ati-
daurbalya  / Kampa / 
Charmadala / Pramilaka 
/ Mlaana  / Twak 
RoukshyaRaktapitta / Upakusha / 
Asyapaka / Raktanetrata 
/ Raktamandal / 
Mukhapaka /Visarpa / 
Vidradhi / Raktameha / 
Vaivarnya / 
Sweda / Indralupta / 
RaktaangaKotha / Pidaka / 
Kustha / Kustha / 
Masaka / Arbuda / 
Dadru / 
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 287Sparshana Sira-shaithilya / Twak 
PaarushyaSiraapurnatwam,
SantaapaSira-Poornatva
Prashna Amlashishira-prarthana  
/ Swarakshaya, MadaRaktapitta / Murcchaa 
/ Pootighrana / 
Asyagandhita / Pradara 
/ Pipasa / Annapanasya 
Vida / Sweda / Sharira-
Daurgandhya  / JvaraAgnimandya / 
Gurugatrata / Aruchi /
Klama / Lavanasyata /
Kandu
Haematology 
T.L.C. D.L.C.
T R.B.C. Hb%
MCV/MCH/
MCHC
E.S.R.
BT / CT / PT
Yakrita,
Pleeha,
Sira
USG / MRI / 
LFT
SWEDAVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Aswedana / Swedanaasa 
/ Romachyuti / Twak 
Sphutana Atiswedana
Sparshana Paarushya / Sparsha 
VaigunyaSlakshnangataa
Prashna Paridaaha / Twak- 
DourgandhyaLomaharsha / 
Kandu
Twak / Roma
ANNAVAHA SROTASA PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Aadhmaana 
Sparshana
288 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
Prashna Shooloa / Ati-
UdgaraPipaasaa / Amla-
Katu-UdgaraAnannaabhilashanam / 
Arochakam / Avipaaka/
Annadwesha  / Chhardi / 
Madhura Udgara
Ruchi Arasagyata Amla/Tikta Asyata Aruchi/Madhurasyata
Abhyavaharana 
ShaktiVishama 
Kshudha Atikshudha Anannabhilasha
Jarana Shakti Vishama Vidaha Aam-Ajeerna
Examination of 
GIT, Gall BladderInspection palpation percussion auscultation
X-Ray / USG
Free acid/total 
HCL examination
MUTRA & MUTRAVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA   KAPHA
Darshana Aadhmaana / 
Mutravaivarnya  
Sparshana
Prashna Alpa Pravritti/
alpamutrataa / Sashula 
Pravritti / Bastitoda / 
Mutrakrichchhrata / 
PipaasaaSadaha - Atisrista 
PravrittiBahala Mutra/prabhut 
mutrata / Atibaddha 
Pravritti / Kandu/
Mootra Pariksha
Physical , Chemical 
& Microscopic
Culture 
examination
Examination of 
Urinary TractInspection palpation
X Ray, USG,
RFT
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 289VATA STHANA PARIKSHA:
VRIDDHI KSHAYA PRAKOPA
Darshana Kaarshya / Krishnataa / 
Gaadha Varchastwam / 
Anaaha Alpa Chestataa / Alpa 
Vaaktwam / Mudha 
Sajnataa / Uchchhwaasa-
Niswaasa Mandataa Khanja / Pangu / Kubjatwa 
/ 
Angasosha /
 Aakshepa
Sparshana Twak Paarushya Gaatrasuptataa
Prashna Vaakpaarushyam / 
Gaatrasphurana / 
Ushna Kaamitaa / 
Nidraa Naasa / 
Alpabalatwa / 
Sakritgraha /Indriya 
Bhramsha / Dainya 
Praalaapa / Gaadha 
VarchastwamApraharsha / Utsaaha 
Haani / Manda Pravritti-
Sweda-Mutra-PurishaSankocha / Parvastambha 
/ Asthibheda / Parvabheda 
/ Anidrataa / Naasha-
Garbha-Sukra-Raja/ 
Spandanam- Hundana-Sira 
/ (Naasaa-Akshi-Jatru-
Grivaa)-Bheda+Toda / 
Arti / Moha / Aayaasa / 
Manovyaaharsana / Indriya 
Upahanana / Bhaya / Shoka 
/ Graha-(Paani, -Pristha-Sira) 
/ Pralaapa / Lomaharsha
ASTHI & ASTHIVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA 
BHAAVAVATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana Dantabhanga / 
Nakhabhanga / Roukshya 
/ Patana-(Kesa-Smashru-
Loma) Adhi asthi / adhi 
dantaVivarnataa / Dosha in Kesa-
Loma-Nakha-Shmashru
Sparshana
Prashna Asthitoda / Shrama
Examination of Bones, 
Nails, 
Hairs and examination 
of Parathyroid gland
X Ray, USG, Bone scan
S. calcium, Thyroid 
hormone
290 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
PURISHAVAHA SROTAS PARIKSHA:
PAREEKSHYA BHAAVA VATA PITTA KAPHA
Darshana
Sparshana
Prashna Aatopa / Adhovata Sanga /Adhovata 
Ati Pravritti / Kukhishoola / Sakrit 
Vedanaa / Hritpidaa  / Paarswapidaa / 
Sasabda Vaatasya Urdhwagamana / 
Aadhmaana / Aantrapidana  / 
Kukshinamana / Vaayoh Tiryagurdhya 
GamanaGourava
Purisha Pariksha
Consistency(Samhanana)-
Varna(Colouration)-
Gandha (Odour)-
Saama / Niraama 
Kathina / Roukshya  
Krishna / Aruna 
Prakrutha / Vikrutha –Drava
Peeta, 
RaktaSashleshma
Shveta
Stool Examination
Examination of Large 
Intestine, Rectum, Anus, 
(P/R) 
X Ray- BARIUM ENEMA 
USG, COLONOSCOPY, 
SANGYAVAHA, MANOVAHA, CHETANA VAHI SROTASA:
PAREEKSHYA BHAAVA- DARSHANA, 
SPARSHANA PRASHNA (ANUMANA)VATA PITTA KAPHA
Karmendriya Pariksha
GYANENDRIYA 
PARIKSHA
   Karna-
   Nasa-
   Netra-
   Jihva-
   Tvacha
Manas Karma Pariksha
Buddhi Pariksha
Nervous System Examination, 
CNS, 
Motor & Sensory
EEG, MRI, CT SCAN, Nerve conduction Test
ATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 291ROGA PARIKSHA:  
SAMPRAPTHI GHATAKA
1) DOSHA:
2) DOOSHYA:  
 Dhatu:  Rasa / Rakta / Mansa / Meda / Asthi / Majja / Shukra
 Upadhatu:  Stanya / Raja / Kandara / Sira / Dhamani / Twacha / Snau
 Mala:  Poorisha / Mootra / Sweda / Kapha / Pitta / Khamala / Kesha /  
  Nakha / Akshisneha / Loma / Shmashru
3) SROTASA & SROTODUSHTI TYPE: Sanaga/Vimargagamana/Atipravrutti/  
 Sira Granthi  
4) AGNI:    Sama / Vishama / Tikshna / Manda
5) UDBHAVASTHANA:  Ama / Pakwa..............................
6) ADHISHTHANA:   Ama / Pakwa.............................. 
7) VYAKTISTHANA:   ......................................... 
8) KRIYAKALA:   ............................... 
9) ROGAMARGA:   Koshtha / Shakha / Marma ...............
10) VYADHI SWARUPA:  Chirakaari / Aasukaari, Mrudu/Daaruna, Naveena/Jeerna
NIDAANA: 
POORVARUPA (Prodormal Symptoms) : 
ROOPA (Sign & Symptoms) : 
UPASHAYA: 
ANUPASHAYA: 
SAMPRAAPTI (Pathogenesis) : 
SAMBHAVITHA VYADHI:
VIBHEDAKA/VYAVACCHEDA NIDANA (Differential Diagnosis)– 
292 AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINESATURA PARIKSHA PATRAK
ROGAVINISCHAYA (Diagnosis) : 
VYADHI AVASTHA:  SAAMA/NIRAAMA, UTTHANA/GAMBHIRA
SAADHYAASAADHYATAA (Prognosis) : Saadhya/Krichchhrasaadhya/Yaapya/
Pratyaakheya
UPADRAVA (Complication) :
NIDANA (Etiology):
Signature of Vaidya
